=== page 1 ===
Getting on Track
Space and Airborne Sensors for Hypersonic 
Missile Defense
PROJECT DIRECTOR
Tom Karako
AUTHOR
Masao Dahlgren
A Report of the CSIS Missile Defense Project
DECEMBER 2023
=== page 2 ===
Getting on Track
Space and Airborne Sensors for Hypersonic  
Missile Defense
PROJECT DIRECTOR
Tom Karako 
AUTHOR
Masao Dahlgren
DECEMBER 2023
A Report of the CSIS Missile Defense Project
=== page 3 ===
Getting on Track  |  II
About CSIS 
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research 
organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former 
U.S. senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as 
president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of 
values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, 
integrity and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the 
goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, 
analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media 
appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with 
relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the 
thinking of key influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be 
understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2023 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | www.csis.org
=== page 4 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  III
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the many peer reviewers who were generous with their 
time and expertise during the course of this project, including Mark Lewis, Doug Loverro, Todd 
Harrison, Kari Bingen, Jason Keen, Ken Harmon, and many others who remain anonymous. Within 
the CSIS Aerospace Security Project and the Missile Defense Project, Kaitlyn Johnson, Thomas G. 
Roberts, Shaan Shaikh, Ian Williams, Wes Rumbaugh, Seth Walton, and Marie Dean contributed to 
the research and production of this report. 
This report is made possible with support from General Atomics, L3Harris, Leidos, and Lockheed 
Martin. The research team leveraged computer simulation tools, including SMARTSet, an air and 
missile defense simulation tool, provided by Iroquois Systems/Lockheed Martin, and Systems 
Toolkit (STK) Enterprise, provided by Ansys Government Initiatives (AGI).
=== page 5 ===
Getting on Track  |  IV
Contents
List of Tables and Figures VI
List of Acronyms IX
Key Findings XI
1. T he Elevated Sensing Imperative  1
Elevated Sensing Missions 2
Unpacking the Tradeoffs: Art and Science 5
Modeling the Problem 7
2. Sensor Tradeoffs 10
Hypersonic Weapon Signatures 12
Sensors, Field of View, and Architecture 13
Alternative Sensor Types 21
3. Orbital Tradeoffs 24
Low Earth Orbit 24
Effects of Proximity 25
Systemic Threats to Proliferated Low Earth Orbit 31
Medium Earth Orbit 34
Geosynchronous and Highly Elliptical Orbits 38
Airborne Architectures 41
Opportunism or Persistence 41
Sizing a Constellation 43
Finding the Right Mix 45
Addressing LEO Indo-Pacific Coverage 46
Selective Polar Coverage with HEO 47
Combining Layers for Resilience 49
4. Schedule Tradeoffs 52
=== page 6 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  V
5. An Emerging Architecture 60
Next Generation OPIR 63
Resilient Missile Warning/Missile Tracking – Low Earth Orbit (Proliferated Warfighter 
Space Architecture) 65
Resilient Missile Warning/Missile Tracking – Medium Earth Orbit 71
Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor  72
Seeking Alignment 73
6. Three Temptations 74
Temptation to Abdicate 74
Temptation to Overoptimize 76
Deploy Gracefully 76
An Airborne Underlay 77
Reducing Integration Risks 79
Temptation to Consolidate 83
7. Staying on Track 86
Appendix 88
Sensor-Level Analysis 88
Constellation-Level Analysis 90
About the Authors 94
Endnotes 95
=== page 7 ===
Getting on Track  |  VI
List of Tables and Figures
Tables
Table 1: Elevated Sensing Missions 4
Table 2: Approximate Orbital Lifespan (King-Hele) of 0.01m2/kg Object with Average Solar  
Activity  30
Table 3: Selected OPIR Missile Sensing Initiatives 62
Table 4: Approaches to Resilience 83
Figures
Figure 1: Radar Line of Sight Limitations  2
Figure 2: Missile Defense Space Assets 3
Figure 3: SDA Tracking Layer Deployment 6
Figure 4: Simulated Hypersonic Tracking Scenario 8
Figure 5: 3D Model Used in Simulated Scenario 9
Figure 6: NASA Infrared Scene Data 9
Figure 7: CSIS Hypersonic Vehicle Signature 9
Figure 8: Hypersonic and Ballistic Signatures 11
Figure 9:  Missile Signature Comparison and Detectability to SBIRS 11
Figure 10: Simulated Infrared View of Hypersonic Signature   12
Figure 11: Surface Thermal Gradient of Space Shuttle Orbiter during Hypersonic Reentry 13
Figure 12: Depiction of Stereo Tracking 1 4
Figure 13: Satellite Field of Regard 1 5
Figure 14: Field of Regard Footprints 16
Figure 15: Pixel Footprint, Field of View, and Sensitivity Tradeoffs 1 7
Figure 16: Field of Regard and Coverage: 100-, 110-, and 120-Degree Sensors 1 7
Figure 17: Field of Regard and Coverage: 100-, 110-, and 120-Degree Sensors 18
=== page 8 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  VII
Figure 18: Infrared Focal Plane Array Formats 19
Figure 19: SBIRS Sensor Fields of View 2 0
Figure 20: Relation of Design Parameters 2 0
Figure 21: Progress in Large-Format Infrared Focal Plane Arrays  21
Figure 22: Booster Plume Signatures and Hypersonic Plasma 22
Figure 23: Declining Space Launch Costs 25
Figure 24: Aperture Effects on Resolution 26
Figure 25: Motion Blur and Jitter Effects 26
Figure 26: Relative Motion and Dwell Time Comparison 27
Figure 27: Notional 135-Satellite LEO Constellation (120-Degree Field of Regard) 28
Figure 28: Notional 312-Satellite LEO Constellation (110-Degree Field of Regard) 2 9
Figure 29: Space Development Agency Planned Constellation Life Cycle 30
Figure 30: Counterspace Threats 31
Figure 31: High-Altitude Nuclear Tests 3 2
Figure 32: Nuclear Pumping in Space 33
Figure 33: Orbital Debris 34
Figure 34: Satellites Needed for Geometric, Two-Satellite Global Coverage 3 5
Figure 35: Notional 15-Satellite MEO Constellation at 10,000 km 36
Figure 36: Radiation Fluxes on Orbit 3 7
Figure 37: Effects of Increased Solar Radiation on Satellite Imaging Sensor 38
Figure 38: Depiction of the SBIRS and DSP Architecture 39
Figure 39: SBIRS-HEO Sensor View of a Boosting Rocket  40
Figure 40: NASA ATREX Flight Event 42
Figure 41: Multispectral Target System  4 3
Figure 42: Detection Ranges of Surface and Airborne Sensors 44
Figure 43: Combined Equatorial Constellation and Coverage (135 LEO, 8 MEO) 46
Figure 44: Combined Equatorial Constellation and Coverage (36 LEO, 8 MEO) 4 7
Figure 45: Combined Equatorial Constellation and Coverage (4 HEO, 8 MEO) 48
=== page 9 ===
Getting on Track  |  VIII
Figure 46: Combined Constellation and Coverage (4 HEO, 15 MEO, 70 LEO) 4 9
Figure 47: Combined Constellation and Coverage (30 MEO, 135 LEO) 50
Figure 48: Alternative Capability Phasing  53
Figure 49: High-Inclination Orbital Plane Persistence  54
Figure 50: Low-Inclination Orbital Plane Persistence 54
Figure 51: Half-Populated LEO Constellation 5 5
Figure 52: Combining Constellations 56
Figure 53: Combining Low- and High-Inclination Constellations: Regional Coverage 5 7
Figure 54: Combining Low- and High-Inclination Constellations: Global Coverage 58
Figure 55: Space-Based Missile Warning and Tracking Modernization by Orbit, 2018–2028 61
Figure 56: Space-Based Missile Warning and Missile Tracking Space Sensor Modernization by 
Mission, 2018–2028 63
Figure 57: Space-Based Missile Warning Modernization by Type, 2018–2028 64
Figure 58: Space-Based Missile Tracking Modernization by Program, 2018–2028 66
Figure 59: SDA Tranche 0 Constellation 6 7
Figure 60: SDA Tranche 1 Constellation 68
Figure 61: SDA Tranche 2 Constellation 69
Figure 62: SDA Tracking Layer Tranche 2 Coverage 7 0
Figure 63: SDA Tracking Layer Tranche 1 and 2 Combined Coverage 71
Figure 64: SSC MEO Roadmap 72
Figure 65: Valleys of Death in Defense Acquisition 7 6
Figure 66: Regional and Global Coverage Definitions Investigated 77
Figure 67: Airborne Sensors near Guam 7 8
Figure 68: Data Transport Pathways 80
Figure 69: Counterspace Developments, Tests, and Deployments, 2006–2022 8 2
Figure 70: Mission Assurance Contributors 84
Figure 71: Solar Exclusion 9 2
=== page 10 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  IX
List of Acronyms
ASAT – Anti-satellite 
BMDS – Ballistic Missile Defense System
BOA – BMDS OPIR Architecture
CAP – Combat air patrol
DSP – Defense Support Program
EGS – Enterprise Ground System
EOIR – Electro-optical infrared
FC – Fire control 
FOR – Field of regard
FORGE – Future Operationally Resilient Ground Evolution
FOV – Field of view
FPA – Focal plane array
GEO – Geosynchronous orbit
GPS – Global Positioning System
HALE – High-altitude, long-endurance
HBTSS – Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor
HEO – Highly elliptical orbit 
HGV – Hypersonic glide vehicle
IFOV – Immediate field of view
IR - Infrared
ITW/AA – Integrated Tactical Warning/Attack Assessment
LEO – Low Earth orbit
MALE – Medium-altitude, long-endurance
MDA – Missile Defense Agency
MDS – Missile Defense System
=== page 11 ===
Getting on Track  |  X
MDP – Missile Defense Project (CSIS)
MEO – Medium Earth orbit
MFOV – Medium field of view
MIMO – Multiple-input, multiple-output
MT – Missile tracking 
MW – Missile warning
NDSA – National Defense Space Architecture
NEI – Noise equivalent irradiance 
OPIR – Overhead Persistent Infrared
pLEO – Proliferated low Earth orbit
PNT – Position, navigation, and timing
PWSA – Proliferated Warfighter Space Architecture
RMW/MT – Resilient Missile Warning/Missile Tracking
SBIRS – Space Based Infrared System 
SDA – Space Development Agency
SSC – Space Systems Command
THAAD – Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
UAS – Uncrewed aerial system
UAV – Uncrewed aerial vehicle
USSF – United States Space Force
WFOV – Wide field of view
=== page 12 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  XI
Key Findings
  ▪ A new, elevated sensor architecture is required to detect, identify, and track a spectrum of 
maneuvering missile threats with sufficient quality to support missile defense fire control. 
These threats combine high speeds, unpredictable, non-ballistic trajectories, and large raid 
sizes to stress legacy defense designs. 
  ▪ The future of missile defense and missile defeat will be contingent on the development, 
characteristics, and fielding timeline of this architecture. One cannot defend against what 
one cannot see.
  ▪ There is no such thing as a perfect sensor architecture design. Designing an elevated sensor 
architecture is rather an exercise in tradeoffs. Given this multiplicity of trades, architecture 
design is as much an art as a science. The application of this art to specific designs reflects 
various institutional and policy assumptions. 
  ▪ Unpacking these tradeoffs and assumptions—making them explicit—can help policymakers, 
budgeteers, and system architects, and better inform the public discussion related to 
missile tracking and missile defense. Doing so is the purpose of this report. This report does 
not advocate a particular architecture, but instead elaborates these tradeoffs, identifies 
principles to inform future architectures, and highlights temptations to avoid.
  ▪ No single orbit or domain represents an optimal approach for missile defense sensing. 
Low (LEO), medium (MEO), geosynchronous (GEO), and highly elliptical orbits (HEO) each 
contribute varied advantages for coverage, schedule, cost, and resilience. 
  ▪ Proliferating space sensors in LEO is one way to improve resilience, assuming large numbers 
and low-cost replacement. It is not the only way. Reliance on a single orbital regime, or on 
any single approach to resilience, invites disruption. LEO constellations can be degraded by 
area- or domain-wide effects, including electronic attack, nuclear or radiological means, and 
the intentional generation of debris. 
  ▪ The Department of Defense’s recently updated plan to deploy a mixed-orbit missile tracking 
constellation is thus a welcome step for enhancing resilience. Sensor architectures should 
complicate adversary targeting by leveraging the unique benefits and drawbacks of multiple 
orbits and domains.
  ▪ The deployment phasing of a sensor architecture is as critical as its final delivery date.  
Choices over orbital configurations not only affect final sensor coverage but how coverage 
develops over time. Sensor constellations optimized purely for coverage efficiencies do not 
necessarily generate persistent coverage until most elements are deployed. For nearer-term 
coverage, especially for the lower latitudes relevant to the Indo-Pacific and other theaters, 
policymakers should be attentive to the pacing of sensor fielding, not only the final product—
graceful deployment as well as graceful degradation.
=== page 13 ===
Getting on Track  |  XII
  ▪ While a space-based sensor architecture is necessary for global missile tracking coverage, 
a suborbital underlay of airborne sensors could improve point or regional coverage, hedge 
against schedule or capability gaps of orbiting sensors, and enhance overall system-level 
survivability. Airborne sensors offer unique detection modalities and could support persistent, 
localized coverage unbounded by the predictability and rigidity of orbital mechanics. 
  ▪ Sensor fusion is a major and underappreciated source of schedule risk. Delays in developing 
sensor fusion software and infrastructure contributed significantly to past space program 
cost and schedule overruns. Further steps are needed to prioritize command and control and 
fusion algorithm development for larger satellite constellations and multiple sensor types. 
  ▪ Fire control-quality tracking must be a fundamental requirement for the emergent elevated 
sensing architecture. The technical requirements for fire control tracks are relative 
measures, contingent on the performance of other elements in the missile defense kill 
chain. Less stringent track data requirements would require interceptors with costlier, more 
capable seekers or more ability to maneuver to compensate for positional uncertainties. 
Conversely, more accurate sensor data would both improve the performance of existing 
systems and ease design requirements for future interceptors. 
  ▪ Infrared sensor performance is a function of the target’s signature and the sensor’s 
resolution, sensitivity, and field of view. Both wide- and medium-field-of-view sensors share 
promise for fire control-quality tracking. In recent years, Congress has prudently scrutinized 
and sustained efforts to deploy fire control sensors, including the Hypersonic and Ballistic 
Tracking Space Sensor (HBTSS), which is slated to transfer from the Missile Defense Agency 
to the Space Force around 2026. Whatever the sensor configuration and type, it is imperative 
that fire control efforts cross the valley of death and deploy at scale. 
  ▪ Many of the technologies and programs to realize an elevated sensor architecture are in place, 
but a disciplined acquisition and systems engineering authority will be needed to align its 
many components. Policymakers must exert oversight to ensure schedule discipline, orbital 
and systems diversity, and continued attention to missile defense fire control requirements. 
  ▪ Acquiring this new elevated sensor architecture will be an exercise in avoiding certain 
temptations. These include temptations to optimize global coverage efficiencies at the 
expense of schedule and resilience, to consolidate assets into a single orbital regime, and to 
abdicate fire control requirements.
=== page 14 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  1
1
The Elevated Sensing 
Imperative
I
n this new missile age, adversaries and allies alike are acquiring a broad spectrum of standoff 
capabilities.1 New and emerging categories of weapons include hypersonic glide vehicles, 
scramjet cruise missiles, maneuvering reentry vehicles, and orbital bombardment systems. 
These and other advanced missiles have become “weapons of choice” for competitors, who 
are conceiving new means to evade legacy missile defenses and hold critical assets at risk.2 The 
sophistication, diversity, and number of missile threats continue to advance. 
Conflicts in Ukraine and elsewhere have confirmed the centrality of missile strike and the 
corresponding need for missile defense.3 As part of a comprehensive approach, active missile 
defenses have become foundational to broad deterrence and defense goals.4 Today’s missile defense 
capabilities, however, are coming under increasing stress. Today’s spectrum of threats leverage high 
speeds, unpredictable maneuvers, and different trajectories to exploit gaps and seams in legacy 
missile defenses. New classes of hypersonic missiles, for instance, threaten to underfly the radar 
horizons of surface-based radars, leaving insufficient time for a defender to react (Figure 1).5 One 
cannot defend against what one cannot see. 
Contending with these threats will require specific attention to modernizing the sensor architecture. 
The missile defense enterprise requires elevated sensors to detect, identify, and track them before and 
after launch. Compared to surface-based sensors, those on satellites or aircraft offer longer lines of 
sight for tracking hypersonic and other advanced missile systems.6 As such, the 2022 Missile Defense 
Review noted that space-based sensing will be “critical to any future integrated sensor network. ”7 
=== page 15 ===
Getting on Track  |  2
Elevated sensing has thus become an acquisition priority for the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD). 
Through its component Space Development Agency (SDA) and Space Systems Command (SSC), 
the U.S. Space Force has invested billions to acquire space-based sensors for missile warning and 
tracking (Figure 3). The Missile Defense Agency (MDA), meanwhile, is prototyping space sensors 
for missile defense fire control—the process of guiding interceptors to an incoming threat (Figure 
2). These and other stakeholders have advanced different visions for the future sensor architecture. 
The question now is how to reconcile and implement these visions, and on what timeline.
Figure 1: Radar Line of Sight Limitations 
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Elevated Sensing Missions
The DoD is developing satellite constellations to perform multiple sensing missions, including 
missile warning, missile tracking, and fire control (Table 1). These lines of effort include the Next 
Generation Overhead Persistent Infrared (Next Gen OPIR) and Resilient Missile Warning/Missile 
Tracking (RMW/MT) satellite constellations, which will recapitalize existing missile warning 
capabilities and track hypersonic and advanced missile threats throughout their trajectory, from 
birth to death. 
While significant work on next-generation missile warning satellites continues, such efforts are not 
discussed here in detail. This report is instead focused on efforts to develop space-based missile 
tracking capabilities, especially for fire control—activities traditionally performed with ground- and 
sea-based radars.

=== page 16 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  3
Figure 2: Missile Defense Space Assets
Source: Missile Defense Agency.
The United States currently relies on the Space Based Infrared System (SBIRS) and Defense Support 
Program (DSP) satellites to provide global missile warning—persistent notification of missile 
launches in support of strategic nuclear deterrence and other defense and intelligence missions. 
As contributors to the Ballistic Missile Defense System (BMDS) Overhead Persistent Infrared 
Architecture (BOA), SBIRS and other sensors support the Missile Defense System (MDS) by providing 
early missile tracking data to cue its broader network of sensors.8 This initial detection sets the 
missile defense targeting process in motion, cueing a sophisticated network of ground and maritime 
radars to determine the positions, trajectories, and signatures of ballistic missiles. 
As incoming missiles continue to fly, the MDS synthesizes sensor measurement data into three-
dimensional “tracks”: estimations of the missile’s position and trajectory. Different sensors deliver 
track information at different quality levels, with different degrees of latency and positional 
uncertainty, for different numbers of threat objects. These tracks must then be fused together into a 
single, trusted picture.
It is one thing to know that some number of missiles have been launched and that they are headed 
in a general direction. It is another to know how many, where they will be at a given moment, 
and thus how to defeat them. Using sufficiently accurate tracking data, a missile defense system 
can develop a fire control solution, determining when to launch one or more interceptors, what 
trajectory the interceptors should travel, and other considerations for engaging the targets. “Fire 
control-quality” tracks are those with the position and time accuracy sufficient for a missile defense 
system to generate an intercept solution. 

=== page 17 ===
Getting on Track  |  4
Table 1: Elevated Sensing Missions
Mission Description Current Capabilities Envisioned Capabilities
Missile 
Warning
Missile warning missions 
include the uncued 
detection of missile 
launches, with some 
ability to track missile 
trajectories in early stages 
of flight.
Space Based Infrared 
System (SBIRS) satellite 
constellation, Defense 
Support Program (DSP)
Next Generation Overhead 
Persistent Infrared 
(OPIR) GEO and HEO 
constellations, Resilient 
Missile Warning/Missile 
Tracking (RMW/MT) 
constellation (MEO and LEO)
Missile 
Tracking
Missile tracking missions 
involve tracking missile 
trajectories throughout 
flight, including after main 
motor burnout. 
Surface-based radars, 
SBIRS constellation
Surface-based radar, Next 
Generation OPIR GEO/HEO, 
RMW/MT9 (MEO and LEO)
Fire 
control-
quality 
Tracking 
(Missile 
Defense)
Fire control-quality 
tracking, sometimes 
described as the missile 
defense mission, 
involves tracking missile 
trajectories with the 
data quality necessary 
to discriminate correct 
targets and directly 
support missile defense 
intercept. If performed 
with narrower-field-of-view 
sensors, it may require 
cueing from other assets.
Various surface-based 
radars
Surface-based radar, 
Hypersonic and Ballistic 
Tracking Space Sensor 
(HBTSS) satellites (demo), 
RMW/MT (MEO and LEO)
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
The technical requirements for fire control-quality tracks are relative measures, contingent on 
the performance of other elements in the missile defense kill chain. Less stringent track data 
requirements would require interceptors with costlier, more capable seekers or more ability to 
maneuver to compensate for positional uncertainties. Conversely, more accurate sensor data 
would both improve the performance of existing systems and ease design requirements for future 
interceptors.10 General James Dickinson, commander of U.S. Space Command, recently noted that 
fire control-quality tracking “is going to determine the success or failure of whatever weapon system 
you’re employing to defeat that threat. ” Realizing it is therefore “exceptionally important. ”11 
While the functions of future missile defense engagements will remain similar to those of the past, 
the characteristics of several new classes of missile threats will impose new requirements for the 
sensing architecture. Surface-based tracking of new and emergent maneuvering missile threats 
=== page 18 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  5
remains both useful and necessary for the spectrum of missile threats, but it is insufficient for some 
of the newer types. Earth’s geometry limits surface-based radar from detecting and engaging lower-
flying targets, including hypersonic weapons.12 Given these new threats, missile defenses require 
elevated sensors for the missile tracking mission, and to do so with more highly detailed, lower-
latency trajectory estimations to support the fire control mission.
“Fire control-quality” tracks are those with the position and time 
accuracy sufficient for a missile defense system to generate an 
intercept solution. 
Achieving this vision will carry enormous challenges. The effective employment of fire control quality 
tracks will require new processing, networking, and sensor fusion capabilities to synthesize missile 
tracks and compute fire control solutions. Precise tracking furthermore demands attention to a wide 
variety of new threat signatures, the presence of background clutter, future countermeasures, and 
other challenges. Addressing these problems will be difficult, but it must be done.
Requirements for the future elevated sensor architecture are tightly coupled with every other 
aspect of the missile defense kill chain. Sensor design requirements drive interceptor design 
requirements—the schedule for one affects the schedule for the other. Sensor capability may 
therefore be compared to a locomotive that pulls other missile defense capabilities forward. In the 
words of Frank Turner, technical director of the Space Development Agency, “Schedule is king. The 
train is going to leave the station on time. ”13
“In carrying out the analysis of candidate fire control architectures, the Secretary of the Air 
Force shall ensure that the Director of the Space Warfighting Analysis Center of the Space 
Force, at a minimum, maintains the requirements needed for the missile defense command 
and control, battle management, and communications system to pass the needed quality 
data within the timelines needed for current and planned interceptor systems to support 
engagements of ballistic and hypersonic threats. ”
–2023 National Defense Authorization Act14
Unpacking the Tradeoffs: Art and Science
There is no such thing as a perfect sensor architecture design. Designing an elevated sensor 
architecture is rather an exercise in tradeoffs. There are, for instance, a multiplicity of trades among 
orbital altitudes and inclinations, sensor phenomenologies, and other variables. Assumptions 
about future threats to the architecture influence final design configurations and standards for 
survivability and resilience. Decisions about schedule, or when certain capabilities are necessary, 
likewise affect technical requirements. 
=== page 19 ===
Getting on Track  |  6
Figure 3: SDA Tracking Layer Deployment
Source: Space Development Agency.15
Given this multiplicity of trades, architecture design is as much an art as a science. The application 
of this art in specific force designs reflects institutional and policy assumptions. 
These system- and architecture-wide tradeoffs have been all too implicit in the public conversation 
about sensor architecture acquisition, presenting an oversight challenge. The number of 
considerations makes it difficult to define clear metrics for success, a challenge made more complex 
by the number of stakeholders involved and continual revisions made to their architectures. Clearer 
goalposts are needed to understand, align, and implement an acquisition strategy. 
Unpacking these tradeoffs and assumptions—making them explicit—can help policymakers, 
budgeteers, and systems architects, and better inform the public discussion related to missile 
tracking and missile defense. Doing so is the purpose of this report. This report does not advocate a 
particular architecture but instead elaborates these tradeoffs, describes ongoing acquisition efforts, 
and identifies policy temptations to avoid. From these, three principles become relevant to the 
acquisition of a future architecture. 

=== page 20 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  7
Given this multiplicity of trades, architecture design is as much 
an art as a science.
One principle is that an elevated sensor architecture should be diversified across multiple 
orbits and domains. Technological advancements in commercial space have generated 
enthusiasm for proliferated, commoditized low Earth orbit (LEO) constellations. Surviving a peer 
threat, however, will demand more. Proliferating space sensors in LEO is one way to improve 
resilience, assuming large numbers and low-cost replacement. It is not the only way. Reliance 
on a single orbital regime, or on any single approach to resilience, invites disruption. LEO 
constellations can be degraded by area- or domain-wide effects, including electronic attack, nuclear 
or radiological means, and the intentional generation of debris. For further altitude diversification, 
a suborbital underlay of airborne sensors could improve point or regional coverage, hedge against 
schedule or capability gaps of orbiting sensors, and enhance overall system-level survivability. As 
tempting as it may be to consolidate acquisition efforts to one orbital domain, a multi-orbit and 
multi-domain architecture is likely to be more survivable. 
Another principle is that an elevated sensor architecture should deploy gracefully. The 
deployment phasing of a new sensor architecture is as critical as its final delivery date. Some 
constellation designs do not generate persistent coverage until nearly all elements are deployed. For 
nearer-term coverage, especially for the lower latitudes of the Indo-Pacific, policymakers should be 
attentive to the pacing of sensor fielding, not only the final product—graceful deployment as well 
as graceful degradation. Lower-inclined orbits or airborne assets may be useful for early coverage 
of critical areas. Sensor fusion is another major and underappreciated source of schedule risk. 
More must be done to accelerate development of software and ground systems to knit these pieces 
together. Schedule is king.
Finally, an elevated sensor architecture must deliver fire control-quality tracking to support 
active missile defense. Requirements for data quality should be developed in close connection 
with the characteristics and limitations of interceptors or other effectors. While much attention has 
been paid to developing elevated missile warning and missile tracking capabilities, Congress has 
prudently scrutinized and sustained efforts to deploy fire control sensors. Whether through the 
Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor (HBTSS), its derivatives, or some future wide-field-
of-view sensor, it is necessary to accelerate and scale a fire control sensor network for the missile 
defense mission. In recent years, SDA has taken valuable additional steps to incorporate fire control 
sensors in its proliferated constellation. It is worth considering how to sustain this momentum and 
achieve fire control capability in the near term.
Modeling the Problem 
This report’s analysis is informed in large part by internal modeling and simulation conducted by 
the CSIS Missile Defense Project (MDP). The research team used ANSYS/AGI’s Systems Toolkit (STK) 
and Iroquois Systems/Lockheed Martin’s SMARTSet tools to model key tradeoffs in constellation 
design. Many of the images included resulted from optimization studies involving nearly a million 
simulations and numerous days of computing time. To speed this process, MDP acquired and 
=== page 21 ===
Getting on Track  |  8
assembled dedicated hardware to accelerate computing tasks. Further details on modeling and 
methodology are described in the appendix. 
The team modeled constellation and sensor design tradeoffs in STK’s synthetic environment. To 
visualize the infrared signatures pictured in the report, MDP leveraged the STK Electro-optical 
Infrared (EOIR) simulation module, creating a scenario (Figure 4) to investigate hypersonic 
tracking challenges. To construct the scene, the team created original 3D models of notional 
hypersonic weapons (Figures 5 and 7) and imported and processed National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration’s (NASA) infrared terrain data (Figure 6). 
Additionally, MDP performed optimization studies to assess how different constellation designs 
could impact sensor coverage. The research team conducted basic assessments of altitude, 
coverage, and custody against hypersonic targets using SMARTSet and performed more detailed 
analyses with STK’s Analyzer tool, which can automatically test and evaluate design possibilities. 
Many of these analyses revolved around constellation designs and their impact on sensor coverage; 
these are pictured throughout the report. The number of potential designs evaluated encompassed 
nearly one million simulation runs. 
These studies are useful for describing the tradeoffs at play in acquiring an elevated sensor architecture. 
It is a low-fidelity modeling effort, and intentionally so—meant to illustrate high-level principles rather 
than prescribe specific designs. Scenarios were constructed to be generalizable and reproducible, and to 
demonstrate the relationship between changing sensor fields of view, inclinations, altitudes, and other 
variables. The constellations and sensors described herein are not presented as recommendations. They 
are meant to inform the conversation and draw out unexamined assumptions.
Figure 4: Simulated Hypersonic Tracking Scenario
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 22 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  9
Figure 5: 3D Model Used in Simulated Scenario
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Figure 6: NASA Infrared Scene Data
A visualization of NASA VIIRS geodata, generated through Panoply with postprocessing applied.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with NASA data. 
Figure 7: CSIS Hypersonic Vehicle Signature
An infrared view of the CSIS simulated hypersonic glide body, displaying temperature differentials across the upper and lower 
sides.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 23 ===
Getting on Track  |  10
2
Sensor Tradeoffs
A
ny discussion of design tradeoffs must begin with the sensors themselves. Constellation 
designs for missile tracking are constrained by the performance of their sensors, which 
must be able to distinguish the signatures of hypersonic and ballistic weapons and resolve 
their positions accurately. 
Although many approaches are possible, the United States has historically addressed the space-
based missile sensing problem with infrared sensors, which passively detect the thermal signatures 
of threat missiles. Infrared and other electro-optical sensors can meet the demanding size, weight, 
and power requirements of space-based platforms and have continued to improve in resolution, 
sensitivity, and cost.
While these technologies are mature, missile tracking and fire control with infrared sensors is more 
challenging than missile warning. Today’s geosynchronous missile warning sensors can detect 
the large, hot exhaust plumes of missiles as they launch but cannot provide detailed tracking 
information after this initial boost phase.16 
Future missile tracking and fire control sensors must be capable of tracking hypersonic weapon 
signatures beyond the boost phase, where their infrared signatures diminish (Figure 8). 
Distinguishing a hypersonic heat signature against the Earth’s background has been likened to 
tracking “a slightly brighter candle in a sea of candles, ” requiring extensive testing to validate.17 
=== page 24 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  11
Figure 8: Hypersonic and Ballistic Signatures
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Figure 9: Missile Signature Comparison and Detectability to SBIRS
Source: U.S. Air Force.18

=== page 25 ===
Getting on Track  |  12
Hypersonic Weapon Signatures
While hypersonic weapons can reach surface 
temperatures as high as 4,000 degrees Fahrenheit and 
leave high-temperature wakes, their signatures are 
dimmer than booster plumes, making them harder to 
track.19 Tracking dimmer targets can be challenging 
because infrared sensors must distinguish them against 
a variety of complex backgrounds: against features on 
Earth’s surface, through atmospheric haze and difficult 
weather conditions, or against the cold backdrop of space, 
with accompanying stars, satellites, and other artifacts. 
Even more challenging are ballistic missile reentry 
vehicles, so-called “cold bodies, ” with thermal 
signatures orders of magnitude lower. Tracking a 
missile across these backdrops, at high speeds and with 
changing viewing angles, demands advanced hardware 
and filtering algorithms to distinguish their signatures 
(Figure 10).20
These signatures can change considerably over a 
missile’s flight (Figure 9). Hypersonic glide weapons, 
for instance, may present brighter signatures as they 
reenter the atmosphere and become dimmer as they 
cruise. Moreover, as these weapons cross a sensor’s 
field of regard (FOR), their appearances change—
features of Earth’s surface appear differently across 
different viewing angles, as do the targets themselves.21 
Signature differences between a hypersonic weapon’s 
leading edges and body, or its upper and lower 
surfaces, can be significant (Figure 11).22 
An infrared sensor at a 1,000 km orbit images a hypersonic weapon located in the center of the frame. Given the sensor’s 
resolution, the missile is too dim to visually distinguish from surrounding objects (top). Detecting them requires computational 
processing, in this case by compositing multiple frames and computing the motion of pixels (center). An enlarged crop of the 
false-color image at center emphasizes the extracted hypersonic signature (bottom). Further details are available in the appendix.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Figure 10: Simulated Infrared 
View of Hypersonic Signature  
=== page 26 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  13
Figure 11: Surface Thermal Gradient of Space Shuttle Orbiter during  
Hypersonic Reentry
Thermal imaging simulations of the Space Shuttle orbiter display the considerable temperature discrepancies possible in 
hypersonic flight.  
Source: NASA.23
Sensors, Field of View, and Architecture
These and other factors affect the number and configuration of sensor platforms in an architecture. 
By flying lower than hypersonic and ballistic weapons, air-based sensors offer advantageous views 
of hot hypersonic weapons against cold space backdrops—but lack the extended sightlines of space-
based sensors. Space sensor constellations, meanwhile, must be carefully optimized for a variety of 
factors, including solar exclusion (viewing angles where sunlight overwhelms the sensor), orbital 
dynamics, and other variables.
An infrared sensor architecture must also be sized to ensure coverage by two sensors at once. 
Unlike with radar, a single infrared imaging sensor cannot resolve a target’s position in three 
dimensions. Two sensors—simultaneously viewing the target—are needed to triangulate a three-
dimensional track of a missile’s altitude, position, and heading (Figure 12). Stereo (two-sensor) or 
greater tracking is a baseline requirement for infrared sensor constellations. Additional redundancy 
may be needed to account for survivability constraints, maintenance downtime, and other factors. 

=== page 27 ===
Getting on Track  |  14
Figure 12: Depiction of Stereo Tracking
Source: Missile Defense Agency.24
Most critically, each sensor’s FOR can affect the number of satellites necessary for a space-based 
sensing constellation. Sensors with a wide FOR can view a wider area of Earth’s surface, either 
by pivoting across a wide swath or by possessing a wide-angle optic (Figure 13). Even relatively 
minor changes in FOR can have considerable effects on coverage footprint and, consequently, the 
number of required satellites (Figure 14). For instance, a given 91-satellite constellation at 1,000 km 
can provide persistent global coverage with a 120-degree FOR but cannot do so with 110-degree or 
100-degree FORs (Figures 16 and 17). 

=== page 28 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  15
Figure 13: Satellite Field of Regard
The three satellites visualized are in low Earth orbit (1,000 km) and have total sensor fields of regard of 100, 110, and 118 degrees, 
respectively. At this altitude, the curvature of the Earth limits increases in line of sight beyond 120 degrees.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 29 ===
Getting on Track  |  16
Figure 14: Field of Regard Footprints
Left to right: Altitude coverage footprints of 100-, 110-, and 118-degree fields of regard.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Selecting wider FORs reduces the number of satellites needed for coverage, but doing so imposes 
additional requirements on the sensor itself. For fixed sensors, increasing sensor FOR requires an 
increase in the sensor field of view (FOV), the angle of view immediately viewable by the sensor. In 
other words, fixed-sensor FOR and FOV are identical. The Space Development Agency’s Tracking 
Layer satellites leverage fixed sensors—its Tranche 0 satellites are required to possess a FOR/FOV of 
70 to 110 degrees.25 
A sensor’s FOR can be larger than its FOV if it is mechanically pointed (slewed) to view a wider 
area. This approach is technically mature and was leveraged in past efforts, such as in the Precision 
Tracking Space System and SBIRS missile-warning satellites (Figure 19).26 Mechanical slewing 
allows a narrower-FOV sensor to offer a large possible coverage—or access—footprint at the cost of 
mechanical complexity and challenges in managing vibration, pointing error, and slewing time. As 
these sensors cannot view every part of their FOR at once, they introduce additional considerations 
for tracking large numbers of targets in various regions: on which targets to view, in what order, and 
how rapidly to revisit them.27
These tradeoffs—between fixed and slewing, wide and narrow—are important because changes in 
sensor FOV affect detection performance. Holding all factors equal, increasing a sensor’s FOV will 
increase its pixel footprint, as each pixel on the sensor’s focal plane array (FPA) corresponds to a 
wider swath of the Earth’s surface. 

=== page 30 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  17
Larger pixel footprints, in turn, make it more challenging to track missile targets (Figure 14). 
Because hypersonic signatures are smaller than most sensor pixel footprints, their location 
becomes more difficult to distinguish as the pixel footprint expands (Figure 15). Moreover, larger 
pixel footprints increasingly “dilute” the brightness of the hypersonic signature with the signature 
of the surrounding terrain. The problem is akin to detecting a cup of boiling water poured into a 
swimming pool; a smaller pixel footprint is akin to detecting that same cup poured into a bucket. 
Holding all else equal, FOV influences performance and drives design decisions between slewed and 
fixed sensors.
Figure 15: Pixel Footprint, Field of View, and Sensitivity Tradeoffs
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Figure 16: Field of Regard and Coverage: 100-, 110-, and 120-Degree Sensors
These three-dimensional views illustrate the stereo sensor coverage of a 91-satellite, 1,000 km altitude constellation. Stereo 
coverage, the minimum necessary, is depicted in yellow; red areas represent simultaneous coverage by eight or more satellites. A 
constellation design that is viable with 120-degree sensors (right) does not provide persistent coverage with 110-degree (center) 
or 100-degree (left).  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 31 ===
Getting on Track  |  18
Figure 17: Field of Regard and Coverage: 100-, 110-, and 120-Degree Sensors
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 32 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  19
Sensors with either narrower FOVs or more pixels can minimize these pixel footprints, thereby 
improving detection performance. Developments in wide-field-of-view (WFOV) sensors have been 
driven by developments in large-format FPAs with higher pixel counts: infrared sensors with 4,000 
pixel-by-4,000 pixel (4K), 6K, 8K, or higher resolutions (Figure 18). Space Systems Command’s 
testbed geosynchronous WFOV satellite, for instance, leverages a large-format FPA with a 4K 
resolution.28 Early Tranche 0 technical requirements call for fixed sensors with an objective FOV of 
roughly 110 degrees and a pixel footprint of under 1.5 km, necessitating large FPAs.29  
The infrared sensor industry has continued to develop larger FPA formats, which allow the use 
of wider FOVs without performance compromise. But there may be some missions where WFOV, 
fixed-sensor approaches are challenging. The Missile Defense Agency’s HBTSS satellites, for 
instance, will use a mechanically slewed medium-FOV (MFOV) sensor to shrink pixel footprints and 
allow fine-grained, fire control-quality missile tracking.30 Choices between fixed WFOV and slewing 
MFOV sensors are dependent on the availability, maturity, and cost of these large-format FPAs. In 
the near term, smaller-format FPAs are available at larger quantities and lower cost.31
Figure 18: Infrared Focal Plane Array Formats
Source: Raytheon Vision Systems. Reprinted with permission.
The size and performance of a constellation thus depends on these interlocking choices: between 
fixed and slewing sensors, sensor FOV, FPA format, and other factors. Maximizing sensor FOR allows a 
designer to minimize the satellites necessary for coverage. Doing so demands fixed sensors with wider 
fields of view or slewing sensors with narrower ones. System architects must balance a complex set of 
variables, each of which influences nearly every other aspect of the system (Figure 20).

=== page 33 ===
Getting on Track  |  20
Figure 19: SBIRS Sensor Fields of View
Source: U.S. Air Force.32
Figure 20: Relation of Design Parameters
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 34 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  21
Figure 21: Progress in Large-Format Infrared Focal Plane Arrays
Source: Raytheon Vision Systems, via SPIE.33 Reprinted with permission. 
Alternative Sensor Types
Infrared sensors are not the only means of tracking missiles from space. Hypersonic weapons emit 
unique signatures that can be exploited.34 Alternative sensor modalities, including hyperspectral 
and radiofrequency sensors, might therefore play important roles. A future sensor architecture 
could leverage multiple sensor types to track hypersonic and other advanced missile threats. 
Hyperspectral or ultraviolet sensors, capable of viewing alternative bands of light, could be relevant 
for detecting hypersonic weapons’ novel signatures. In hypersonic flight, an object’s surface reacts 
with high-temperature airflow to release a wake of ions, gases, particles, and other chemical 
byproducts.35 These byproducts and their signatures might be detectable in infrared and alternative 
spectra (Figure 22).36 As with hypersonic defense, “the same characteristics that make hypersonic 
weapons attractive present the defender with new failure modes to exploit. ”37
Infrared sensors are not the only means of tracking missiles  
from space.
Radiofrequency sensors might offer further utility. Radar offers many advantages: its principles are 
well understood, it can propagate through complex weather conditions, and it can instantaneously 
gather target velocity data.38 Radars have become increasingly sophisticated and efficient; emerging

=== page 35 ===
Getting on Track  |  22
Figure 22: Booster Plume Signatures and Hypersonic Plasma
Solid rocket boosters used to launch hypersonic weapons generate detectable infrared (IR) and ultraviolet (UV) signatures. The 
simulated plume signature (top) represents a broad range of physical phenomena, including the hot gas flow from the booster, 
external hypersonic airflow, the combusted gas and alumina particles from the burning motor, and the phase change of alumina 
particles. A hypersonic weapon in its glide phase encounters similarly complex interactions, generating novel wake signatures. 
Plasmas generated around the hypersonic weapon surface, for instance, react with gas products and particles burned off the vehicle 
surface (bottom). The bottom image represents plasma formation around a Mach 16, 50 km altitude hypersonic shape.  
Source: Iain D. Boyd, H.T. Sears Memorial Professor and Director of Center for National Security Initiatives, University of Colorado, 
Boulder.39 Reprinted with permission. 

=== page 36 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  23
multistatic and multiple-input, multiple-output (MIMO) radar technologies might offer additional 
utilities to the space-based hypersonic tracking problem.40 In addition to active methods, it may be 
possible to passively intercept radio emissions from data-linked missiles.41 The 2022 Missile Defense 
Review notably stated that global and persistent “space-based . . . radar . . . systems will be critical 
to any future integrated sensor network. ”42 
Finally, infrared and other types of electro-optical sensors have continued to improve. Infrared focal 
plane arrays, sensor readouts, and their cooling systems have become increasingly reliable and 
affordable; new developments might allow simplified configurations that do not require cryogenic 
cooling.43 Furthermore, the maturation of large-format infrared FPAs are allowing increases in FOV 
without corresponding resolution losses (Figure 21).
This report is scoped to the infrared sensors being acquired today. But hypersonic weapons present 
novel signatures, enabling new approaches to detection and tracking. Provided that sensor fusion 
challenges can be resolved, a future architecture should integrate advancements in infrared FPAs, 
multispectral and radiofrequency sensors, and other means. Combining these multiple types will 
allow greater persistence and capability if one type is degraded, whether from environmental 
conditions, enemy deception, or other means of signature reduction. While it may be possible to 
evade one part of the electromagnetic spectrum, it is harder to evade several of them.
=== page 37 ===
Getting on Track  |  24
3
Orbital Tradeoffs
S
ensor performance influences the number of assets necessary to provide coverage, but there are 
other tradeoffs to consider. “No absolute rules” govern the design of an optimal constellation.44 
It is possible to track hypersonic weapons from many orbits given the correct selection of sensor 
payloads. At the same time, better design points exist for meeting current and future threats.45 
This chapter reviews relevant orbits for missile sensing and identifies how they could be mixed 
to generate efficiencies. Basic changes in altitude and domain can impact every other aspect of 
performance. A more resilient constellation should mix orbits and domains in ways that maximize 
the advantages of each.
Low Earth Orbit
Marked advances in space launch and satellite manufacturing have made low Earth orbits (LEO) 
increasingly popular for deploying satellite constellations. Legacy satellite programs often struggled 
with a “vicious circle between high reliability and high costs. ”46 High unit costs incentivized the use 
of expensive components to prevent failure, and the use of expensive components contributed to 
high unit cost.47 
Recent declines in launch cost have enabled a paradigm shift in constellation design (Figure 23). 
Commercial actors have broken vicious cost-reliability cycles by embracing rapid replenishment 
over exquisite designs.48 As it becomes more affordable to place satellites in orbit, it becomes 
possible to proliferate larger numbers of satellites, which in turn enables economies of scale in 
satellite manufacturing.49
=== page 38 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  25
Figure 23: Declining Space Launch Costs
Note: Launch costs to LEO in inflation-adjusted FY 2021 dollars, sorted by launch vehicle (individual bubble). A bubble’s size 
corresponds to the number of successful orbital launches achieved by that vehicle as of December 31, 2019.  
Source: CSIS Aerospace Security Project.50
This shift has made LEO orbits increasingly popular for commercial applications.51 Of the over 
6,700 satellites in orbit, over 80 percent now operate in the LEO regime, where their proximity 
to Earth suits them for high-resolution remote sensing and low-latency communications.52 This 
philosophy—a proliferated low Earth orbit (pLEO) architecture—has informed recent approaches to 
national defense space systems.
EFFECTS OF PROXIMITY
The mathematics of proximity operate in favor of LEO satellite constellations. At LEO altitudes—
between 400 and 2,000 km above Earth—even smaller sensors can provide high-resolution imagery 
of Earth’s surface. Further distances demand larger apertures; aperture limits the maximum 
resolution attainable by an infrared sensor (Figure 24).53 Holding other parameters constant, a 
sensor placed in geosynchronous orbit (GEO) requires an aperture several times larger to attain 
comparable resolution to one orbiting at 500 km.54

=== page 39 ===
Getting on Track  |  26
Optical apertures are a significant driver of satellite cost.55 Smaller apertures are less costly to 
manufacture and can reduce the structural mass needed to ensure the vehicle withstands harsh 
shocks during launch. In turn, a reduction in satellite mass allows for lighter reaction wheels to 
orient the vehicle, lighter motors for keeping it in orbit, and correspondingly lower launch costs.56 
Figure 24: Aperture Effects on Resolution
These images depict a hypersonic target viewed from GEO with an infrared sensor. Left: A view of the target with a notional 
extremely large aperture. Center: 60 cm aperture (center), and with 30 cm aperture (right).  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
The proximity of LEO also presents several drawbacks. At these distances, the perceived motion 
between satellite, target, and background becomes more pronounced. This relative motion can 
introduce motion blur to the target picture. Sensors that take longer to collect light are more 
sensitive and more susceptible to motion blurring as the weapon and background move across 
the frame (Figure 25). Shorter collection (“integration”) times, meanwhile, can more effectively 
“freeze” fast-moving objects, but with a cost to sensitivity and detection range. 
Figure 25: Motion Blur and Jitter Effects
A static hypersonic weapon-sized target, imaged from low Earth orbit, with a 35 cm aperture, appears as a blurred point source 
for an infrared sensor (left). Center: The same target displays motion streaking when accounting for sensor integration time: in this 
case, for 10 milliseconds (center). This streak becomes blurred when accounting for additional sensor vibration and jitter (right).  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 40 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  27
Mitigating blur and jitter in infrared sensors 
involves a careful balancing act. Doing so requires 
FPAs with high sensitivities, readout circuits and 
image processors with higher data throughput, 
and algorithms tailored for target signatures 
with high relative motion. While feasible to 
overcome, the problem can be made easier by 
incorporating sensors in higher orbits or leveraging 
alternative phenomenologies.
The closeness of LEO satellites also limits their 
coverage. Compared to satellites at higher altitudes, 
they possess shorter horizon-limited lines of sight 
and persist for less time over a given point on 
Earth’s surface (Figure 26). More satellites will 
be needed to ensure that two are continuously 
overhead. While it is possible to achieve infrequent 
coverage with a small number of satellites, it 
takes significant numbers to make that coverage 
persistent (Figures 27 and 28). 
Figure 26: Relative Motion and Dwell Time Comparison
Comparison of GEO (white), MEO (pink), and LEO (green) satellite motion. 
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 41 ===
Getting on Track  |  28
Figure 27: Notional 135-Satellite LEO Constellation (120-Degree Field of Regard)
A constellation of 135 satellites at 1,000 km altitude with a 120-degree field of regard fixed sensor, sized for persistent global 
coverage. The coverage map depicts two (yellow) and eight or more (red) satellites in view.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 42 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  29
Figure 28: Notional 312-Satellite LEO Constellation (110-Degree Field of Regard)
A constellation at 1,000 km altitude with a 110-degree field of regard fixed sensor. The reduced coverage footprint of each satellite 
necessitates a larger number of satellites to achieve persistent, global stereo coverage. The coverage map depicts two (yellow) 
and eight or more (red) satellites in view.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 43 ===
Getting on Track  |  30
A related consideration for LEO constellation design and cost is the higher replenishment rates 
required over their life cycle. Drag from the upper reaches of Earth’s atmosphere slows satellites 
in orbit, requiring more propulsion to maintain their station. At 600 km, the natural lifespan of a 
generic satellite orbit is approximately 15 years, but this falls dramatically to under one year at 400 
km (Table 2).57 The Space Development Agency (SDA)’s Tracking Layer Tranche 0 satellites, for 
instance, have requirements for minimum operational lifetimes of four to five years, rather than the 
decades possible at higher orbits (Figure 29).58 
Table 2: Approximate Orbital Lifespan (King-Hele) of 0.01m2/kg Object with 
Average Solar Activity
Altitude 
(km) 400 500 600 700 800 900 1,000
Lifespan 
(years) 0.1 6 15 80 400 1,000 2,000
Low Earth orbit lifespans differ significantly, especially at lower altitudes, with different propulsion and station-keeping systems, 
satellite size, density, drag, and solar activity levels.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project, with data adapted from Swiss Re Corporate Solutions, 2018.59
Building a high replenishment cadence into a constellation’s life cycle is not entirely a disadvantage. 
The higher replenishment cadence of LEO constellations enables alternative philosophies to 
constellation design and the space industrial base. There is less need to overengineer for reliability, 
for instance, if a satellite’s lifespan is capped at five years.60 The consistent need for replenishment 
creates consistent demand for satellite production, keeping production lines hot, enabling 
economies of scale, and building a resilient defense industrial base.61 
Figure 29: Space Development Agency Planned Constellation Life Cycle
The number of satellites in orbit does not remain constant because as more are launched, others degrade. Satellites launched in 
FY 2024, for instance, begin to deorbit in FY 2029, causing fluctuations in the total figures. Further launches in FY 2029 and FY 
2031 both expand and replenish the planned low Earth orbit constellation.  
Source: Space Development Agency.62 
High replenishment rates also permit new technologies to be “spiraled in” as older satellites 
deorbit. Long-lived satellites are often constructed with excess capability to ensure their relevance 
decades in the future; shorter-lived satellites can be designed as minimum viable products, 
intended for replacement as technologies and requirements evolve.63 Increased costs—in launching 
more satellites and more frequently replenishing them—must be balanced against the savings 
associated with agile development, manufacturing at scale, and lower relative launch costs 
compared to higher orbits.

=== page 44 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  31
SYSTEMIC THREATS TO PROLIFERATED LOW EARTH ORBIT
Technological advancements in commercial space have generated enthusiasm for pLEO 
constellations. In 2019, Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Michael Griffin 
established SDA for the express purpose of acquiring such constellations.64 In recent years, pLEO 
has become the watchword of space sensor acquisition. It embraces the notion that quantity has a 
quality all its own, with resilience achieved through numerical proliferation, measured both by the 
number of satellites currently deployed and those that could be reconstituted. An effective pLEO 
architecture promises to invert the cost asymmetries of traditional counterspace operations; the 
potential to make it more costly to destroy LEO satellites than to launch them has informed the 
emphasis on pLEO in recent years.65
Adversary counterspace capabilities, however, should not be underestimated. A pLEO architecture 
provides resilience to certain kinds of counterspace threats but not others (Figure 30). Indeed, 
putting all one’s eggs in the LEO basket may incur risks: vulnerability to systemic threats that affect 
the entire orbital regime. “We don’t want to become so dependent or so vulnerable, potentially, in 
the pLEO, ” General James Dickinson of U.S. Space Command has warned, “as opposed to having a 
diversification, where you have capabilities and different orbital regimes [to] rely on. ”66
Figure 30: Counterspace Threats
Direct-ascent anti-satellite, co-orbital, and ground site attacks all can be difficult to scale against increasingly proliferated 
constellation designs. Nuclear effects and cyberattacks could paralyze large segments of proliferated constellations at once.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project. 
These systemic threats—threats that exploit a failure mode common to the entire architecture—merit 
further consideration. Cyberattacks against a constellation’s control systems or nuclear detonations 
in space could disable many satellites at once. The growing density of space debris in LEO is an 
additional cause for concern, and one that is increasingly difficult to mitigate. Even if the cost of 

=== page 45 ===
Getting on Track  |  32
individual kinetic anti-satellite (ASAT) attacks exceeds the cost of launching additional LEO satellites, 
the debris generated from these engagements could make those orbits challenging to reconstitute. It is 
simpler to proliferate and reconstitute in LEO, but also potentially simpler to attack.67
Putting all one’s eggs in the LEO basket may incur risks: 
vulnerability to systemic threats that affect the entire orbital regime.
Cyberattacks remain a persistent area threat for any distributed architecture, whether in LEO, 
medium Earth orbit (MEO), GEO, or highly elliptical orbit (HEO). Software to orchestrate so many 
satellites at once—for orbital maintenance, collision avoidance, data transport, and tasking—presents a 
large attack surface for potential intrusions.68 While difficult to characterize, cyberattacks represent a 
critical area threat and a major risk category for all national security satellite architectures. 
Less discussed are the area threats posed by nuclear explosions in space or at high altitudes (Figure 
31). Nuclear explosions cause many immediate damaging effects: the pulse of thermal, x-ray, and 
other radiation can damage nearby satellites and blind their sensors.69 
An even greater concern, however, is nuclear pumping, a phenomenon where nuclear radiation 
lingers in the LEO environment (Figure 32).70 In LEO, Earth’s geomagnetic field would contain 
many of the charged particles emitted by a nuclear explosion; instead of radiating outward, these 
particles could spiral around the globe and damage large numbers of satellites.71 A 2002 Ballistic 
Missile Defense Organization analysis assessed that “a precursor high altitude nuclear burst could 
do significant damage to satellites, ” with “pumped-up Van Allen belts [posing] a concern for satellite 
longevity” and “not well understood. ”72
The radiation left in these belts could make it challenging to maintain and reconstitute a pLEO 
constellation. Indeed, while it is less costly to proliferate and reconstitute LEO constellations, more 
attention must be paid to these systemic threats.
Figure 31: High-Altitude Nuclear Tests
Far left: “Orange,” 3.9-megaton detonation at 43 km altitude; left: “Teak,” 3.8 megatons at 76.8 km altitude; center: “Kingfish”; right: 
“Checkmate”; and far right: “Starfish,” 1.4 megatons at 400 km altitude.  
Source: Ballistic Missile Defense Organization.73

=== page 46 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  33
Figure 32: Nuclear Pumping in Space
Radiation from nuclear detonations can become trapped in Earth’s geomagnetic field, affecting the longevity of satellites. 
Source: U.S. EMP Commission.74
A third concern is the increasing population of satellites and debris in LEO. The growing popularity of 
these orbits have made it challenging to avoid collisions (Figure 33). Between December 2022 and May 
2023, satellites in the commercial Starlink constellation performed over 25,000 collision-avoidance 
maneuvers, representing roughly half of the number of Starlink maneuvers since 2019.75 These debris 
fields could densify after a large-scale attack. Debris generated in just three ASAT missile tests account 
for 15 percent of tracked debris in LEO.76 While Starlink satellites orbit lower than planned national 
security LEO constellations, it is emblematic of a larger problem: growing debris fields could threaten 
future operations, forcing collision-avoidance maneuvers that consume fuel and disrupt coverage. 
These systemic threats could be difficult to attribute or deter. Cyberattacks generate attribution 
challenges that complicate potential responses. Intentional debris generation can be deniable: 
a debris field, generated by a foreign kinetic ASAT test, could be justified as a peacetime 
operation but be as disruptive to operations as a direct, unambiguous attack. Adversaries might 
even detonate a nuclear device over their own territory under the pretense of a test.77 Chinese 

=== page 47 ===
Getting on Track  |  34
scientific organizations have reportedly begun to reassess similar options to counter U.S. satellite 
constellations.78 Despite the damage their effects could cause, these deniable, systemic threats 
challenge the United States’ ability to devise a proportional response. 
Figure 33: Orbital Debris
Note: A visualization of over 24,631 tracked objects in orbit. Active satellites imaged in green, inactive satellites imaged in gray. Red 
orbital rings at 1,000, 10,000, and 36,000 km altitudes.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with data from AGI and U.S. Space Force. 
It is therefore useful to examine other orbital regimes, including MEO and airborne domains, 
which could complement LEO’s advantages and help mitigate these vulnerabilities. A survivable 
sensor constellation would likely incorporate assets in multiple orbits, reducing the impact of such 
area-wide attacks.
Medium Earth Orbit
Placing satellites in higher orbits can offer coverage and survivability advantages not achievable 
from LEO alone. Operating at higher altitudes allows each satellite to view a larger swath of Earth’s 
surface, reducing the numbers necessary for global coverage (Figures 34 and 35). MEO, a family of 
orbits between 2,000 and 35,999 km from Earth’s surface, offers several attractive design points 
for satellite constellations. By moving a satellite’s orbit from 1,000 to 10,000 km, for example, a 
satellite’s detection footprint against low-flying hypersonic targets is roughly quadrupled. 

=== page 48 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  35
Figure 34: Satellites Needed for Geometric, Two-Satellite Global Coverage
This graphic illustrates the relationship between altitude and the theoretical minimum number of satellites required for stereo 
coverage. Operational constellations would require considerably greater numbers of satellites at every altitude when considering 
sensor field of regard, solar exclusion, maintenance, and power factors. Geometric coverage minimums were derived from CSIS 
parametric analysis.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
These substantial gains in viewable area, and the slower relative motion of these satellites across 
Earth’s surface, have made these orbits useful for navigational satellites, where large numbers must 
be in view at once. The Global Positioning System (GPS), with roughly 31 satellites in a 20,000 km 
orbit, allows for every point on Earth to be reachable by four or more satellites.79 

=== page 49 ===
Getting on Track  |  36
Figure 35: Notional 15-Satellite MEO Constellation at 10,000 km
MEO satellite coverage, from stereo (yellow) to eight or more (red).  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 50 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  37
MEO satellites represent only a small fraction of satellites currently in orbit.80 This is because of the 
high radiation levels in the MEO environment. Earth’s geomagnetic field traps high-energy particles 
from the Sun and other sources, creating several belts of elevated radiation.81 In some scenarios, 
dosages in this regime can exceed 50 rad daily, a dosage equivalent to roughly 16 abdominal CT 
scans.82 This harsh operating regime introduces challenges for constellation designers. While MEO 
represents a large set of possible orbits, most MEO constellations operate in a smaller number of 
“sweet spot” altitudes and inclinations, such as at 10,000 km, where radiation is lowest (Figure 36). 
Figure 36: Radiation Fluxes on Orbit
Representative orbits at 1,000 km (LEO), 10,000 km (MEO), 20,000 km (MEO), and 36,000 km (GEO). The highest fluxes are indicated 
by red coloration.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with data from NASA.83 
Without hardening, these fluxes can significantly degrade a satellite’s subsystems. The interaction 
of solar winds and free ions in this environment can charge spacecraft components and cause 
unintended electrical interference. High-energy particles can degrade coatings and solar panels on 
the spacecraft surface and damage electronics and detector arrays within a spacecraft (Figure 37).84 
These issues remain a concern for national security satellite constellations; unexpected radiation 
levels impacted availability of satellites in the Space Tracking and Surveillance System (STSS), for 
instance, which orbited at high LEO altitudes of roughly 1,350 km.85

=== page 51 ===
Getting on Track  |  38
Figure 37: Effects of Increased Solar Radiation on Satellite Imaging Sensor
False-color image of the Sun taken by solar probe before (left) and (after) a solar radiation spike on October 28 and 29, 2003. Radiation 
can cause additional noise and false pixels to appear on imaging sensors, requiring specialized packaging and software to mitigate.  
Source: NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center Scientific Visualization Studio.86 
Additionally, radiation can disrupt a satellite’s control circuitry. Computer processors and memory 
degrade over time with exposure to radiation. In addition to this total-dose-induced damage, they 
are susceptible to single-event effects, where charged particles strike a logic gate or memory cell 
and change its state from one to zero (“bit flip”) or prevent it from switching altogether (“stuck 
bit”).87 These in turn can cause malfunctions or permanent damage.88 Mitigating this often requires 
dedicated circuitry and software to correct errors or specialized, radiation-hardened circuits, which 
are typically slower and more costly than commercial equivalents.89
While challenging, these environments confer some survivability benefits. Their greater distance, 
relative to LEO, places them out of reach of some lower-tier ASAT weapons; attacking MEO assets 
with a direct-ascent weapon, for instance, would take a significantly larger missile and a substantially 
longer time. While still vulnerable to prompt nuclear effects, the MEO environment faces relatively 
less of a nuclear-pumping challenge—moreover, as MEO satellites must already be hardened to 
withstand elevated radiation, those costs can be amortized for mitigating nuclear effects.90 
The relative sparsity of the MEO environment, finally, can be conducive to monitoring co-orbital ASAT 
threats. Co-orbital weapons, placed into similar orbits as MEO satellites, are a common approach to 
kinetically attacking MEO and further orbits. With roughly 3 percent of spacecraft orbiting in MEO, it 
may be relatively easier to observe, distinguish, and counter suspicious behavior.91
Geosynchronous and Highly Elliptical Orbits
Geosynchronous orbits, at roughly 36,000 km from Earth, require even fewer satellites to achieve 
persistent coverage. At this distance, satellites orbiting the equator stay effectively stationary over 
a fixed point on Earth’s surface, orbiting at the same rate as Earth turns. No other orbit can provide 
a similar level of persistence—at the cost of placing satellites at an extreme distance. Current and 
forthcoming missile warning satellites, including SBIRS and Next Gen OPIR, occupy these orbits, 
where persistent coverage is achievable with only a small number of assets.

=== page 52 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  39
Figure 38: Depiction of the SBIRS and DSP Architecture
The Space Based Infrared System incorporates geosynchronous and highly elliptical polar satellites. GEO satellites offer latitudinal and 
longitudinal persistence by orbiting at the same rate that the Earth rotates. To maintain this persistence, the orbits must be close to the 
equator. A pair of polar satellites, meanwhile, can offer persistent coverage of at least one satellite over the poles.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Satellites in highly elliptical orbits offer similar advantages, offering persistent, staring coverage 
near Earth’s poles. In such orbits, satellites come within several hundred kilometers of Earth before 
swinging far into space, often tens of thousands of kilometers away. As a HEO satellite approaches 
=== page 53 ===
Getting on Track  |  40
the highest point in its orbit—the apogee—its velocity slows, allowing it to “hang” over a specific 
region for longer than the time spent at the lowest point, the perigee. 
A minimum of two HEO satellites is necessary to provide continuous coverage of Earth’s high-
latitude regions. When combined with equatorial GEO satellites, which offer persistence at most 
lower latitudes, only a few satellites become needed to provide whole-Earth coverage. The SBIRS 
missile warning constellation, for example, includes six GEO satellites to provide coverage of most 
latitudes, and two highly elliptical polar satellites to maintain custody of the North Pole and upper 
Northern Hemisphere (Figures 38 and 39). 
Figure 39: SBIRS-HEO Sensor View of a Boosting Rocket
Image degraded for declassification.  
Source: U.S. Air Force.92
The extreme distances of these constellations introduce novel operational considerations. Much 
larger apertures are needed to image targets at high resolution. As such, it becomes challenging to 
perform more detailed sensing missions, including midcourse and boost-phase tracking.93 Radio 
signals and light can take up to 220 milliseconds to reach the sensor of a satellite in GEO.94 
Launch costs for the requisite geostationary transfer orbits, moreover, are often double to triple the 
price of launches to LEO.95 GEO and polar satellites, designed with fuel to travel from such transfer 

=== page 54 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  41
orbits to their final positions, take longer to place on orbit, and often require larger structures. 
While fewer satellites are needed for coverage, each unit can become costly to produce.
Systems in these higher orbits, however, can be more difficult to target with some ASAT weapons. 
It is expensive to acquire direct-ascent missiles capable of targeting systems in GEO; competitors 
have instead developed sophisticated co-orbital weapons capable of hiding and persisting in 
geosynchronous orbits.96 While the popularity of geosynchronous orbits makes it simpler to conceal 
co-orbital weapons systems, HEO systems, with their high speeds and fewer numbers, may be 
harder to attack. 
Airborne Architectures
To be sure, the conversation about elevated sensors has thus far revolved around space-based 
platforms. This emphasis is understandable and indeed necessary for achieving persistent, global 
coverage. But airborne platforms may also have a role to play. The United States could risk a gap 
in capability if space constellations do not come online as scheduled or if other problems develop. 
Several factors counsel an exploration of airborne sensors for missile tracking. 
Airborne sensor platforms are mature and, despite their smaller coverage footprints, could generate 
persistent sensing capability in ways that spacecraft cannot, particularly for specific defended 
locations, such as the National Capital Region, Okinawa, or Guam. While limited to regional 
applications, airborne sensors could serve an interim system, backfilling coverage while a space 
constellation is deployed. Additionally, airborne sensors might serve as an underlay for space 
sensors, increasing coverage density in these critical regions. 
OPPORTUNISM OR PERSISTENCE
There are two ways to conceptualize an airborne underlay: as an opportunistic, occasional 
capability, and as a persistent architecture. Several aircraft in service possess a residual capability 
to detect and track ballistic missiles opportunistically. In Desert Storm, for example, Air Force F-15s 
could occasionally detect Scud missile launches during their strike missions but lacked the weapons 
to engage them or the endurance to patrol for extended periods of time.97 More recently, in 2012, an 
F-35 was able to detect a NASA space launch in its initial phases using onboard infrared sensors at 
distances of up to 1,481 km.98
=== page 55 ===
Getting on Track  |  42
Figure 40: NASA ATREX Flight Event
Footage from the F-35 AAQ-37 Distributed Aperture System infrared sensor. During the test, an F-35 tracked several multi-stage 
rockets with its radar and infrared sensors.  
Source: Northrop Grumman.99
An opportunistic approach might integrate these existing platforms into the Missile Defense 
System (MDS). Fifth-generation fighters, such as the F-35, have already demonstrated the ability to 
communicate fire control-quality tracking information to surface-based missile defenses (Figure 
40).100 While such capabilities cannot persistently cover a defended region and may be called for 
other mission areas, more could be done to develop the doctrine and datalinks to weave existing 
sensor assets into the MDS.101
A more robust approach would be to incorporate a persistent airborne underlay for defending 
critical locations such as Guam. The systems needed for this mission would require long 
endurances and would ideally fly at higher altitudes than fighter aircraft, allowing for further 
lines of sight. Such aircraft, equipped with longer-range sensors, would maintain fixed orbits—or 
combat air patrols (CAPs)—over a position, with enough aircraft in inventory to maintain one or 
more aloft at any point in time.

=== page 56 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  43
Figure 41: Multispectral Target System 
Source: Missile Defense Agency.102
Such elements have been a recurring feature of boost-phase missile defense designs but are relevant 
to many other missions, including hypersonic missile defense. Relevant airborne missile-tracking 
capabilities have already been demonstrated. Between 2015 and 2017, the Missile Defense Agency 
(MDA) used a pair of multispectral-sensor-equipped MQ-9 uncrewed aerial systems (UAS) to track 
ballistic and cruise missiles (Figure 41).103 Flying at a 12.8 km altitude, the pair of aircraft tracked 
intermediate- and medium-range ballistic missiles from over 1,000 km away. An orbit of modestly 
persistent sensor aircraft—drones, high-altitude balloons, or others—could contribute to the defense 
of regional assets in concert with a space sensor system.
SIZING A CONSTELLATION
As with space architectures, designing a persistent airborne sensor layer is an inexact art with 
few absolute rules. Designers must reconcile the number of aircraft required, their individual 
cost and performance, the locations of possible CAPs, and the bases where aircraft are stored and 
maintained to construct a viable system. 

=== page 57 ===
Getting on Track  |  44
Of these considerations, an aircraft’s operating altitude is especially critical. Higher-flying systems 
can offer further viewing horizons against low-flying targets and other sensing and survivability 
advantages. Hypersonic weapons flying at 20 km will enter a 15 km-altitude aircraft’s line of sight 
at 950 km—roughly 65 percent farther than a ground-based sensor (Figure 42).104 Moreover, high 
altitudes offer clearer atmospheric conditions for optical transmission, potentially easing the 
employment of infrared and other electro-optical sensors.105 Aircraft flying at altitudes above 10 km 
may also be difficult to engage with lower-tier surface-to-air missiles, offering survivability advantages. 
Figure 42: Detection Ranges of Surface and Airborne Sensors
Surface-based sensors (left) cannot detect low-flying targets at longer distances. Elevating the sensor altitude from sea level to a 
15 km-altitude aircraft (right) allows for substantially increased viewable distance.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project. 
An equally important consideration is aircraft endurance. Long-endurance aircraft are critical to 
minimize the fleet size and other associated costs needed to maintain a CAP. High-altitude, long-
endurance (HALE) aircraft, such as the RQ-4, and medium-altitude, long-endurance (MALE) aircraft, 
such as the MQ-9B, can offer endurances of over 24 hours, increasing the time spent on station or 
reducing requirements for aerial refueling.106 Prior analyses have estimated that roughly 3 to 4 MQ-
9B aircraft could maintain a persistent CAP, with a force-level quantity of up to 17, including spares, 
needed to maintain three continuous CAPs for up to 270 days per year.107 
Fleet size requirements are also affected by the location of airbases relative to CAP locations. The 
further the CAP is from an airbase, the longer each aircraft must spend transiting to the patrol 
region, reducing the fuel available to be on station. Transit time can dramatically increase the 
numbers required to maintain persistent coverage, holding other factors equal. Achieving the 
smallest fleet possible will require permissive basing and overflight requirements to minimize the 
flyout distances needed.

=== page 58 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  45
Finding the Right Mix
The Department of Defense is currently moving toward a multi-orbit architecture in LEO, 
MEO, GEO, and HEO. These developments acknowledge how efficiencies in some orbits offset 
inefficiencies in another.108 
LEO constellations benefit from proliferation and economies of scale but suffer challenges with 
persistence, orbital lifespan, and relative motion. MEO constellations offer more coverage and 
persistence but require potentially costlier satellites with larger apertures and radiation-hardened 
subsystems. GEO and HEO satellites provide unique coverage characteristics, requiring few satellites 
to selectively cover a given pole or longitude, but generate high unit costs and stringent reliability 
requirements. Airborne sensors can generate persistence unbounded by spacecraft orbital mechanics 
but have smaller detection footprints and require appropriate basing locations to operate. 
The models depicted herein highlight these tradeoffs and the possible benefits of leveraging 
hybrid architectures—constellations with multiple orbital altitudes. LEO constellations in efficient, 
highly inclined orbits, for example, tend to under-cover areas near the equator, including 
critical parts of the Indo-Pacific region. MEO assets, orbiting about the equator, could usefully 
complement these configurations. 
A constellation designed for equatorial and mid-latitude coverage, by contrast, might be 
supplemented with HEO assets that could selectively cover the poles. A combination of assets in 
different orbital bands, with their different levels of relative motion and viewing angles, might 
ease the challenge of tracking hypersonic and ballistic targets, whose thermal signatures vary 
significantly based on background and sensor viewing angles.
Configurations combining multiple orbital altitudes can add resilience and scale without 
dramatically increasing the number of orbital planes necessary. These models are illustrative: 
they do not depict ideal constellation designs, nor do they depict the redundancies needed for 
survivability. They rather demonstrate how orbits could be mixed to cover priority regions more 
efficiently. As acknowledged by Michael Griffin, former undersecretary of defense for research and 
engineering and a leading proponent of proliferated low Earth orbit constellations, an effective 
architecture should be “as widely distributed [as possible] over many choices of orbital regimes. ”109
=== page 59 ===
Getting on Track  |  46
ADDRESSING LEO INDO-PACIFIC COVERAGE
A high-inclination LEO constellation optimized for global coverage will produce the least coverage 
in latitudes near the equator. These latitudes, however, are most relevant for the Indo-Pacific 
theater. It is often more costly to add additional orbital planes (rings) than it is to add more satellites 
to a given orbital plane, as this requires separate launches to take place. One approach to enhance 
coverage of these latitudes could be to add a single equatorial orbital plane with eight satellites, at 
MEO (10,000 km) (Figure 43). 
Figure 43: Combined Equatorial Constellation and Coverage (135 LEO, 8 MEO)
This simulation depicts a mixed constellation of 135 LEO satellites at 1,000 km altitude and 8 MEO satellites at 10,000 km altitude. 
Right: Map of satellite coverage; yellow regions indicate two-satellite coverage, while red regions indicate eight-satellite coverage 
or greater.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 60 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  47
Figure 44: Combined Equatorial Constellation and Coverage (36 LEO, 8 MEO)
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
A second illustrative design, with 36 LEO satellites and a single, 8-satellite MEO plane, puts this principle 
in sharper relief (Figure 44). MEO satellites are used exclusively to provide coverage to mid-latitudes, 
while a highly inclined LEO constellation provides persistent coverage of the higher latitudes and poles.
SELECTIVE POLAR COVERAGE WITH HIGHLY ELLIPTICAL ORBIT
HEO satellites offer the unique ability to selectively cover a single pole; as most threats transit the 
Northern Hemisphere, it allows constellation designs that do not “waste” coverage. A constellation 
of four HEO satellites can provide persistent stereo coverage of the polar regions, useful for missile 
warning. A mixed constellation of eight MEO satellites in an equatorial orbit and four HEO satellites 
illustrates this selective coverage capability (Figure 45).

=== page 61 ===
Getting on Track  |  48
Figure 45: Combined Equatorial Constellation and Coverage (4 HEO, 8 MEO)
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 62 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  49
COMBINING LAYERS FOR RESILIENCE
Figure 46: Combined Constellation and Coverage (4 HEO, 15 MEO, 70 LEO)
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 63 ===
Getting on Track  |  50
Figure 47: Combined Constellation and Coverage (30 MEO, 135 LEO)
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
=== page 64 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  51
Hybrid constellations can combine their coverage hotspots to increase emphasis on critical regions. 
A LEO constellation with lower inclinations can provide dense coverage of the Indo-Pacific region, 
while a smaller constellation of MEO and HEO assets can provide an additional layer of resilience 
and selective emphasis on the poles (Figure 46). Meanwhile, a dense constellation, combining a 
polar-region-heavy LEO constellation and an Indo-Pacific-weighted MEO constellation, achieves 
robust, uniform coverage with 165 satellites (Figure 47). 
=== page 65 ===
Getting on Track  |  52
4
Schedule Tradeoffs
N
o single orbit presents an ideal set of launch costs, satellite configurations, and coverage 
for missile tracking and fire control. A sensor architecture design must optimize a large 
collection of intersecting variables, including sensor field of regard (FOR), altitude, 
inclination, and satellite unit cost, among others.110 Most attention has been paid to optimizing 
these elements to minimize the number of satellites needed for coverage, but there are other 
goals to consider. An architecture must also be optimized to meet useful schedules and to phase 
capability in ways relevant to the threat. 
Program schedule and capability phasing should receive more consideration in current acquisition 
efforts. Choices over orbital configurations not only affect final sensor coverage but how coverage 
develops over time. Two constellation designs that eventually produce identical coverage may not 
necessarily generate capability along the same timelines (Figure 48). 
Indeed, capability may not come online in smooth or continuous increments. Many low Earth orbit 
(LEO) constellation designs, for instance, leverage multiple orbital planes with high inclinations—
inclinations close to the poles—to provide regional and later, global coverage. These designs are 
optimized to minimize the number of satellites necessary for coverage and do not provide persistent 
coverage of lower latitudes until all orbital planes are deployed (Figures 49, 50, and 51). Notably, 
the Space Development Agency (SDA)’s early Tranche 0 and Tranche 1 LEO constellations are 
configured with high-inclination orbits.111 The cost of these high inclinations to capability phasing is 
not always made explicit. 
=== page 66 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  53
Figure 48: Alternative Capability Phasing 
Two space-based architectures (“A” and “B”) may deliver identical capability when completed but phase this capability on 
different timelines. Architecture B generates partial capability later but full capability earlier. These tradeoffs should be considered 
when contemplating two otherwise identical architectures. They should also impact considerations for secondary constellations 
or airborne underlays to fill gaps in capability phasing.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Choices over orbital configurations not only affect final sensor 
coverage but how coverage develops over time.
As such, the structure of a constellation has implications for program schedule. LEO constellations 
of high-inclination satellites are efficient for generating global coverage with the fewest satellites. 
Other architectures, however, might generate persistent regional coverage sooner. 
Much has been said about the need for resilience against attack, or what is called “graceful 
degradation. ”112 Less attention has been given to optimizing for “graceful deployment. ” A 
constellation optimized purely for coverage efficiencies may well deliver capability unevenly, with 
relevant, persistent coverage only arriving near completion. Such a glidepath is arguably in tension 
with the incremental, spiral-development-focused philosophy of proliferated low Earth orbit 
constellation deployment. 

=== page 67 ===
Getting on Track  |  54
Figure 49: High-Inclination Orbital 
Plane Persistence
LEO assets with high inclinations cannot persistently cover low-
latitude regions over time (images shown in two- 
hour increments).  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Figure 50: Low-Inclination Orbital 
Plane Persistence
LEO assets at lower inclinations can persistently cover near-
equator regions at the expense of polar coverage. These 
tradeoffs ease with higher altitudes, including in MEO.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 68 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  55
Figure 51: Half-Populated LEO Constellation
Highly inclined LEO constellations offer little persistent coverage of relevant equatorial regions. This LEO constellation of 36 
satellites cannot offer persistent coverage until more orbital planes are added. Persistent equatorial coverage only emerges after 
the number of satellites is more than tripled.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 69 ===
Getting on Track  |  56
Besides the need to mitigate technical and security risks to a future constellation, capability phasing 
is a critical consideration for program-level risk. It is impossible to predict future supply chain 
bottlenecks, changes in budgetary priorities, or other factors that could hobble a constellation’s 
deployment.113 As such, architecture designs should be resilient to the risk of premature budget 
reductions or cancellation. Some constellation designs will not generate persistent coverage of 
meaningful regions should deployment be canceled halfway (Figure 52). It thus becomes crucial to 
consider which designs would offer meaningful coverage even when partially deployed. 
A constellation optimized for graceful deployment may entail the selection of alternative 
configurations and may require more satellites to achieve coverage. Such costs are nevertheless 
worth considering (Figure 52). A constellation optimized solely for long-term efficiencies incurs 
short-term risks. In addition to programmatic risks, they can tempt adversaries to accelerate the 
development of countermeasures, knowing that capability will only arrive at once at a single 
future maturation point. Partial capability can and should arrive earlier. Multiple avenues—lower-
inclination orbits, regional airborne sensors, and others—exist for realizing them. 
Figure 52: Combining Constellations
Realizing global geometric coverage in two steps (right, center) can entail more satellites (40+26) than a constellation optimized 
for global coverage (49) (left). 
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
One avenue to graceful deployment could involve separating constellation deployment into multiple 
steps. For example, a LEO constellation could be designed as a hybrid architecture, deploying a low-
inclination set of 70 satellites for regional coverage (Figure 53) before expanding to global coverage 
with a second set of 36 highly inclined sensors (Figure 54). While this could entail more satellites 
than higher-inclination alternatives, it delivers increments of coverage in two steps, achieving 
regional coverage much sooner. 

=== page 70 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  57
Figure 53: Combining Low- and High-Inclination Constellations: Regional Coverage
A low-inclination constellation of 70 LEO satellites achieves persistent regional coverage; with the addition of 36 satellites (Figure 
54), coverage can be expanded to a global scale, in two steps.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project. 

=== page 71 ===
Getting on Track  |  58
Figure 54: Combining Low- and High-Inclination Constellations: Global Coverage
A high-inclination constellation of 36 satellites, used to expand to persistent global coverage.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 72 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  59
Another method may be to deploy underlays, such as aircraft-based sensors, to backfill capability 
until a space constellation is deployed. Regardless of approach, there are many possible 
levers for smoothing capability deployment. Careful selection of phased constellations, or the 
deployment of airborne underlays and other assets, could produce coverage of relevant areas in 
shorter increments.
Schedule and capability phasing deserve to be key factors in assessing this trade space. Recent 
requests presented by SDA imply increased attention to these problems. In a recent solicitation for 
new Tracking Layer LEO satellites, for instance, SDA requested potential solutions for constellations 
including mixes of higher and lower inclinations.114 
A design that deploys gracefully could offer useful capability even when incomplete. One that 
does not deploy gracefully will not deliver such benefits, despite any promise of future numerical 
efficiencies. If a geopolitical crisis occurs in the late 2020s, the United States will have to fight with the 
space sensor constellation that is fielded, not the complete architecture planned in the longer term. 
=== page 73 ===
Getting on Track  |  60
5
An Emerging 
Architecture 
T
hese many sensor, orbital, and schedule tradeoffs are at play in the Department of Defense 
(DoD)’s ongoing space sensor acquisition effort. This chapter reviews the envisioned 
missions, programs, and budgets of the forthcoming architecture and considers what 
questions remain unresolved. 
In fiscal year (FY) 2023, the DoD invested nearly $5 billion into acquiring overhead sensors for 
missile warning, tracking, and fire control (Figure 55). These efforts have been partly centralized 
under the Space Force organizational structure, with multiple programs of record underway for 
low (LEO), medium (MEO), geosynchronous (GEO), and highly elliptical (HEO) orbit sensor layers 
(Table 3). Under its Next Generation Overhead Persistent Infrared (OPIR) initiative, the Space 
Force will deploy two GEO (Next Generation GEO) and two HEO (Next Generation Polar) satellites, 
supplementing its Space Based Infrared System (SBIRS) constellation for missile warning. 
A second effort, designated Resilient Missile Warning/Missile Tracking (RMW/MT), will incorporate 
a constellation of nine or more MEO satellites (RMW/MT-MEO) and a larger constellation of LEO 
satellites (RMW/MT-LEO) to perform both missile warning and missile tracking. 
=== page 74 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  61
Figure 55: Space-Based Missile Warning and Tracking Modernization by Orbit, 
2018–2028
*Based on 2024 PB. 
Source: DoD Comptroller and CSIS Missile Defense Project analysis.
In parallel with the RMW/MT-LEO program, the Missile Defense Agency (MDA) has developed 
a prototype sensor, the Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor (HBTSS), capable of 
furnishing the “highly sensitive, low-latency, high quality of service” data needed for the more 
demanding missile defense fire control mission.115 The program will launch two prototype LEO 
satellites in late 2023, after which “responsibility for HBTSS operational fielding will be transferred 
to the US Space Force. ”116
For FY 2024, the Space Force requested $2.6 billion for Next Generation OPIR, including $720 
million for Next Generation GEO, $1 billion for Next Generation Polar, $661 million for associated 
ground systems, $191 million for modernization initiatives, and $31 million for integration. 
Additionally, it requested $2.2 billion for RMW/MT, including $1.2 billion for its LEO constellation, 
$538 million for its MEO constellation, and $506 million for its associated ground systems. For 
HBTSS, MDA requested $69 million, with minimal funding planned after FY 2026 when program 
responsibility is transferred to the Space Force.117

=== page 75 ===
Getting on Track  |  62
Table 3: Selected OPIR Missile Sensing Initiatives
Program Components Mission Satellite 
Quantity Orbit Planned 
Launch
Resilient 
Missile 
Warning/
Missile 
Tracking (RMW/
MT)
Proliferated 
Warfighter 
Space 
Architecture 
(SDA)
Tracking 
Layer 
Tranche 0
MW, MT 8 LEO 2023
Tracking 
Layer 
Tranche 1
MW, MT, 
FC
39 + 
(4 FC)
LEO 2025
Tracking 
Layer 
Tranche 2
MW, MT, 
FC
54 +
(6 FC)
LEO 2027
MEO Epoch 1 (SSC) MW, MT 9 + MEO 2026
Hypersonic 
and Ballistic 
Tracking 
Space Sensor 
(HBTSS)
HBTSS On-Orbit 
Prototypes (MDA) FC 2 LEO 2024
Next 
Generation 
OPIR
Next Generation GEO 
(SSC)
MW 2 GEO 2025–2027
Next Generation Polar 
(SSC)
MW 2 HEO 2028+
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with data from U.S. Department of Defense.
These newer investments represent a welcome shift in resources. In FY 2023, funding for missile 
warning, represented by the Next Generation OPIR portfolio, dwarfed investments in missile tracking, 
represented by RMW/MT (Figure 56). The DoD’s FY 2024 budget request, by contrast, dramatically 
expands investments in the LEO and MEO constellations needed for missile tracking while cutting 
Next Generation GEO, reducing its planned satellite purchases from three to two.118 With its 
cancellation of the seventh and eighth SBIRS and the third Next Generation OPIR satellites, the Space 
Force is pivoting away from an approach centered around geosynchronous missile warning satellites 
to one dominated by large constellations of missile tracking satellites in LEO and MEO.119 
=== page 76 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  63
Figure 56: Space-Based Missile Warning and Missile Tracking Space Sensor 
Modernization by Mission, 2018–2028
*Based on 2024 PB. 
Source: DoD Comptroller and CSIS Missile Defense Project analysis.
Next Generation OPIR
Next Generation OPIR, including its Next Generation GEO and Polar components, formerly 
represented the largest segment of the DoD’s space sensing portfolio (Figure 57). Beyond 
recapitalizing space-based missile warning, whose associated SBIRS and Defense Support Program 
(DSP) satellites entered service decades ago, these satellites will offer enhanced capabilities, 
tracking dimmer targets over wider areas.120 Combined with SBIRS, these satellites will be capable 
of detecting the hot plumes of missile launches, cueing relevant sensors, and informing national 
command authorities. They will supply data to critical interfaces, including the Ballistic Missile 
Defense System (BMDS) Overhead Persistent Infrared Architecture (BOA) and Integrated Tactical 
Warning/Attack Assessment (ITW/AA), a U.S. strategic nuclear warning system.121 

=== page 77 ===
Getting on Track  |  64
Figure 57: Space-Based Missile Warning Modernization by Type, 2018–2028
*Based on 2024 PB. 
Source: DoD Comptroller and CSIS Missile Defense Project analysis.
Between 2018 and 2021, the Space Force awarded $7.8 billion in contracts for the development and 
production of three Next Generation GEO satellites, with initial launches scheduled for 2025.122 Following 
a reorientation of priorities in late 2022, the Space Force plans to cut one Next Generation GEO satellite, 
launching the first in FY 2025 and the second in FY 2027. In FY 2024, the Space Force requested $719 
million for the program, a considerable reduction from the $1.7 billion requested in FY 2023.123 
The first of two Next Generation Polar satellites, meanwhile, is scheduled for launch by FY 2028.124 
These satellites, orbiting at higher inclinations, would provide continuous coverage of the Northern 
Hemisphere and North Pole, supplementing the two SBIRS-HEO satellites presently in orbit. The 
Space Force requested $1 billion for the program in FY 2024.125
These satellites will pass sensor data to users through a new set of ground infrastructure, funded 
at $582 million in FY 2023.126 The Next Generation OPIR Ground component will incorporate the 
Future Operationally Resilient Ground Evolution (FORGE), a system of software, ground terminals, 
and computers for mission management, data processing, telemetry, and command and control. 

=== page 78 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  65
Various components of FORGE are expected to come online through the late 2020s, with 
development for Next Generation GEO and Polar continuing through FY 2028. These efforts come 
in parallel with the Space Force’s Enterprise Ground System (EGS), a broader modernization of the 
organization’s ground systems software, and the Next Generation OPIR Interim Operations (NIO), a 
backup program to prevent FORGE delays from impacting Next Generation GEO launch schedules.
Resilient Missile Warning/Missile Tracking – Low Earth Orbit 
(Proliferated Warfighter Space Architecture)
The RMW/MT program consolidates past efforts to develop a large constellation of LEO satellites 
and a smaller constellation of MEO satellites for missile tracking (Figure 58). As of 2023, this 
constellation would combine up to “135 LEO and 16 Space Force-developed MEO satellites working 
in concert through an integrated ground solution. ”127 In 2023, Space Systems Command (SSC) was 
designated as the “lead end-to-end systems integrator” for the constellation. DoD then created a 
combined program office with SSC, the Space Development Agency (SDA), and MDA.128 It is likely 
that the architecture’s final configuration will change as prototype systems enter orbit. 
RMW/MT’s LEO component consists of SDA’s Tracking Layer constellation, which aims to 
launch successive phases, called “tranches, ” of LEO sensor satellites in two-year increments. 
The acquisition philosophy for the Tracking Layer apparently differs from past military 
space efforts; it is intended to demonstrate capability on commercial timelines and exploit 
commercial components and design philosophies, rather than fitting a traditional requirements 
generation process. 129 
SDA plans to acquire the Tracking Layer and a larger constellation of LEO communications and 
sensing satellites, the Proliferated Warfighter Space Architecture (PWSA; formerly the National 
Defense Space Architecture, or NDSA), using this approach. The PWSA constellation will initially 
include four tranches of LEO satellites, labeled Tranches 0, 1, 2, and 3. Tranche 0 will include 
20 Transport Layer satellites and eight Tracking Layer satellites, which host wide-field-of-view 
(WFOV) infrared sensors and orbit approximately 1,000 km from Earth (Figure 59). 130 SDA 
launched the first 10 of its Tranche 0 satellites in April 2023, and the second launch concluded in 
September 2023.131 
=== page 79 ===
Getting on Track  |  66
Figure 58: Space-Based Missile Tracking Modernization by Program, 2018–2028
*Based on 2024 PB. 
Source: DoD Comptroller and CSIS Missile Defense Project analysis.

=== page 80 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  67
Figure 59: SDA Tranche 0 Constellation
Source: Space Development Agency (top) and CSIS Missile Defense Project (bottom).132 

=== page 81 ===
Getting on Track  |  68
Figure 60: SDA Tranche 1 Constellation
Source: Space Development Agency (top) and CSIS Missile Defense Project (bottom).133

=== page 82 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  69
Figure 61: SDA Tranche 2 Constellation
Source: Space Development Agency (top) and CSIS Missile Defense Project (bottom).134 

=== page 83 ===
Getting on Track  |  70
Plans to develop the Tracking Layer have shifted as Space Force and SDA budgets and priorities 
evolve. A second tranche, Tranche 1, is scheduled to launch in 2025 and would include 39 satellites 
(35 tracking, 4 fire control) orbiting at 1,000 km in five polar orbital planes (Figure 60).135 When 
combined with the Tranche 0 Tracking Layer, these satellites would offer a “kernel” of global 
coverage to warfighters by late 2025.136 The constellation initially consisted of four orbital planes 
with seven Tracking Layer satellites each; a $250 million congressional add, approved in 2023, 
added a fifth plane “to increase global Missile Warning and Missile Tracking coverage in support of 
combatant commands to include INDOPACOM. ”137 
Additional tranches would launch in 2027 and beyond. Tranche 2 would add 54 or more satellites 
(48 tracking, 6 fire control) to provide “global, persistent” missile warning and missile tracking 
while demonstrating a limited fire control capability (Figures 61, 62, and 63). Unlike prior tranches, 
it would deploy three orbital planes to a higher inclination and three orbital planes to a lower 
inclination suited for Indo-Pacific regional coverage. Each plane would have nine satellites; eight 
with WFOV missile warning/missile tracking sensors and one with a missile defense-focused “Fire 
Control quality sensor. ”138 The first plane would enter orbit in April 2027, and deployment would 
conclude by November 2027.139 
Figure 62: SDA Tracking Layer Tranche 2 Coverage
Horizon-limited coverage footprint of Tranche 2 constellation, with pink indicators for fire control coverage.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with data from the Space Development Agency.

=== page 84 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  71
Figure 63: SDA Tracking Layer Tranche 1 and 2 Combined Coverage
Horizon-limited coverage footprint of combined Tranche 1 and 2 constellations, with pink indicators for fire control coverage.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with data from the Space Development Agency.
Tranche 3 and beyond would increase the PWSA Tracking Layer’s density past 135 assets and 
incorporate newer satellite technologies.140 Given the intended five-year orbital lifespan of each 
satellite, these would expand upon and replace earlier tranches, enabling another set of technology 
insertions. While SDA has already defined requirements for earlier tranches, the eventual 
configuration of additions beyond Tranche 3 may vary considerably as satellites are put on orbit.
Resilient Missile Warning/Missile Tracking – Medium  
Earth Orbit
After an initial push and pull between LEO- or MEO-only approaches, the Space Force has 
embarked on efforts to deploy a mixed constellation of LEO and MEO missile tracking satellites. The 
second leg of this mixed constellation, RMW/MT-MEO, will complement the LEO Tracking Layer 
with additional satellites in MEO. This attention to MEO represents an important philosophical shift 
toward hybrid architectures, with MEO particularly useful for assuring coverage of lower latitudes 
(Figures 44 and 45). 
In FY 2023, the Space Force expanded an exploratory effort to prototype MEO tracking satellites, 
MEO Track Custody (MTC), into a full-scale acquisition program integrated with the RMW/MT 
constellation.141 RMW/MT-MEO would acquire nine or more MEO satellites, at two orbital altitudes, 
to “pivot the Department of the Air Force’s (DAF) legacy missile warning force design to a more 
resilient multi-orbit approach. ”142 In FY 2023, Congress appropriated $409 million toward the 
program—more than double the $139 million budget request.143 In FY 2024, the Space Force 
requested $538 million to support the accelerated MEO effort.

=== page 85 ===
Getting on Track  |  72
Figure 64: SSC MEO Roadmap
Source: U.S. Space Systems Command.144
Like SDA’s successive “tranches, ” SSC will deploy MEO capabilities in a series of increments called 
“epochs. ” Epoch 1, deploying in late 2026, will include satellites at two altitudes: a plane of six 
vehicles at a lower orbital altitude and three at a higher one. Successive epochs will likely include 
18 or more satellites, with a possible total of 34 to 44 satellites when complete. By the launch of 
Epoch 3, the constellation will reportedly deliver persistent missile tracking coverage.145 These MEO 
satellites will leverage research performed under the earlier MTC effort, which by May 2021 had 
awarded early contracts for digital satellite prototypes.146 Program design review for one Epoch 1 
satellite concluded in July 2023, and critical design review completed in November 2023.147 
This shift toward a LEO/MEO mixed constellation in FY 2024 follows significant congressional 
scrutiny. In July 2022, the House Armed Services Committee directed the chief of space operations 
to brief the committee on including “free, fair, and open competition within [the Space Force’s] 
acquisition plan” by January 2023.148 Following a $130 million congressional plus-up, the program 
office also moved to add the “third plane of Epoch 1 spacecraft . . . add[ing] additional acceleration 
funds in FY 2024 to . . . aggressively pursue additional Epoch 1 capabilities. ”149 
Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor 
Among these several programs, HBTSS represents the DoD’s current effort to enable the fire 
control-quality tracking mission. HBTSS occupies a critical function in the forthcoming sensor 
ecosystem, aimed at providing the high-fidelity, low-latency tracking information needed to guide 
missile defense interceptors.

=== page 86 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  73
MDA currently retains acquisition authority for HBTSS prototyping. Under the current timeline, 
MDA will prototype and launch a medium-field-of-view sensor to demonstrate fire control-quality 
tracking of hypersonic weapons.150 MDA began prototyping the sensor in 2018 and intends to launch 
two HBTSS-equipped satellite testbeds into orbit in late 2023 or early 2024. Following on-orbit test 
activities, “responsibility for HBTSS operational fielding will be transferred to the US Space Force 
and the MDA will continue the development of the next generation of space-based fire control 
sensors for missile defense. ”151
The prototypes will be placed in orbits intended to “track test events in the INDOPACOM region” 
and would likely leverage a commercially supplied chassis, or bus, to host the HBTSS sensor.152 In 
2021, Congress directed MDA to “achieve full operational employment” of the system by December 
2023.153 On-orbit test activities are scheduled to continue through 2025, including support for Aegis 
and Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) intercept tests in 2024 and 2025.154  
It remains unclear, however, how many HBTSS or HBTSS-derived payloads will eventually be fitted 
to SDA’s Tracking Layer constellation. While MDA requested $68 million for the program in FY 
2023, funding is expected to decline after demonstration activities conclude and responsibility for 
fire control transfers to SSC and SDA.155 Following this transition, SDA aims to launch four HBTSS-
derived sensor payloads as part of its Tranche 1 activities and an additional six fire control sensors 
in Tranche 2.156 Further developmental spirals, the priority accorded to the hypersonic defense 
mission, and SDA’s responsibilities for supporting missile defense, however, have not yet been 
publicly defined.  
Seeking Alignment
Several recent developments have been promising. The DoD has increasingly pivoted from 
an exclusively pLEO design to a mixed-orbit architecture with complementary LEO and MEO 
components.157 In contrast with earlier tranches, SDA’s Tranche 2 will now include assets at lower 
inclinations suited for earlier Indo-Pacific-region coverage.158 Moreover, the Space Force has signaled 
further investments in deploying fire control sensors on orbit, both in SDA Tranches 1 and 2.159 
Questions nevertheless remain over the configuration, schedule, and mission of the forthcoming 
architecture. It remains uncertain how effectively MDA fire control efforts will transition to SDA’s 
architecture and how the planned numbers of fire control satellites in PWSA support requirements 
for hypersonic defense. While Tranche 2 plans include three orbital planes at lower inclinations, 
it is uncertain how this could be expanded to assure persistent Indo-Pacific stereo coverage. Other 
questions—over what mix of LEO and MEO assets is optimal, how to phase deployments to cover the 
Indo-Pacific, what software is necessary to fuse information from so many sensors, and how to align 
ground systems acquisition with the fielding of satellites—are not yet resolved. The DoD has reached 
substantial technical milestones and pioneered innovative approaches to acquiring these systems. 
As one analyst has remarked, however, “there seems to be a lack of consensus on how quickly, and 
in what manner, ” to proceed.160 
=== page 87 ===
Getting on Track  |  74
6
Three Temptations 
B
oth on Capitol Hill and in the Pentagon, senior leaders have expressed the need to 
accelerate the fielding of sensors for hypersonic and ballistic missile defense.161 Doing so 
will require optimizing an entire system of systems—effectors; sensors; command, control, 
and communications systems; and the software that weaves them together. The greater challenge is 
not in constructing these individual parts but in aligning their deployment to deliver capability on 
relevant timelines. 
Realizing the necessary architecture will require attention to potential policy temptations and 
pitfalls. Policymakers may face temptations to abdicate the fire control mission, overoptimize 
for numerical efficiencies, or consolidate to single orbital regimes in the pursuit of savings and 
simplicity. Succumbing to these temptations would come at the cost of speed and resilience.
Temptation to Abdicate
One temptation to avoid is to abdicate the missile defense fire control mission. While technically 
challenging, fire control-quality tracking is needed for hypersonic missile defense. As responsibility 
for fire control transfers from the Missile Defense Agency (MDA) to the Space Force, it could be 
tempting to postpone or deemphasize these difficult requirements.
In other words, fire control should not be redefined as a reach goal. Combatant commands central 
to missile defense, including U.S. Space Command, have recognized the necessity of fire control and 
“strongly endorse[d] continuing work on systems such as . . . the MDA’s Hypersonic and Ballistic 
Tracking Space Sensor. ”162 Congress, moreover, had funded the Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking 
=== page 88 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  75
Space Sensor (HBTSS) and repeatedly kept it within MDA explicitly to ensure schedule discipline 
and applicability to missile defense. Whether or not HBTSS represents the eventual solution, fire 
control requirements should remain a defining feature of sensor architecture design. 
Realizing fire control requirements will be difficult but not impossible. “The ability to detect 
and track dim targets in a cluttered background . . . with the sensitivity necessary to support the 
[counter-] hypersonic kill chain” requires considerable investment to achieve.163 The mission 
demands low latencies and small pixel footprints, achievable either through dedicated medium-
field-of-view (MFOV) systems cued by wide-field-of-view (WFOV) tracking sensors or high-resolution, 
fire control-capable WFOV sensors, pending the supply of larger-format focal planes. An ideal 
constellation might feature both, with responsive WFOV fire control sensors and an additional 
MFOV layer for tracking challenging targets. 
Fire control should not be redefined as a reach goal.
SDA’s commitments to deploying fire control sensors represent an important step in the right 
direction. Despite earlier uncertainties over their prioritization, recent plans suggest that SDA 
will deploy six fire control sensors in the Tranche 2 constellation, after MDA’s two-satellite HBTSS 
demonstration activities conclude.164 The relation of Tranche 2 fire control sensors to HBTSS 
remains publicly unclear. 
The number of fire control tracking satellites planned, however, remains inadequate for providing 
persistent coverage, and the glidepath to transition from an HBTSS-based approach to a future fire 
control system appears uncertain. The six SDA fire control satellites planned to launch in 2027, for 
instance, will be valuable for demonstrating capability but insufficient for achieving persistent Indo-
Pacific coverage. It is worth considering whether these efforts could be expanded; additional satellites 
at these inclinations could generate persistent coverage of the Indo-Pacific. Additional mid-inclination 
satellites would bolster deterrent capability in a critical period, coinciding with Beijing’s timeline to 
develop a Taiwan invasion capability by 2027.165 Even if such threats are delayed, these additional 
satellites could be held in reserve to reconstitute constellations as they deorbit or come under attack.  
Policymakers are right to question if the current approach is enough to support fire control for 
hypersonic and ballistic missile defense. While the Space Force has committed to “the development 
and demonstration of space technologies to deliver Missile Warning, Missile Tracking, and Missile 
Defense (MW/MT/MD) capabilities including advanced missile tracking and fire control, ” it must go 
further to operationalize them.166 
Moreover, the previous, near-complete focus on proliferated low Earth orbit (LEO) sensors is worth 
reconsideration. Space Force efforts to explore fire control tracking from medium Earth orbit (MEO) 
sensors merit further study and potential acceleration. As discussed above, the MEO regime offers 
useful survivability, coverage, and schedule benefits, and deploying a MEO-based fire control layer 
could add useful resilience. 
=== page 89 ===
Getting on Track  |  76
Figure 65: Valleys of Death in Defense Acquisition
Source: U.S. Department of Defense.167
The transfer of fire control tracking sensor programs from MDA to SDA represents an exercise in 
institutional trust. It will also be a test of recognizing the central relation between space and the 
future missile defense enterprise. Continued oversight will be essential, to ensure both that this 
transition effectively takes place and that fire control capability is achieved on schedule and at the 
necessary scale. It will require clear, high-level commitments from Pentagon leadership to allow 
these capabilities to cross the valley of death (Figure 65). 
Temptation to Overoptimize
A second set of policy temptations threatens deployment schedules. Fielding new technologies 
requires experimentation. It is difficult to fully characterize sensor performance without placing 
them on orbit; spiral development approaches, such as those employed by SDA, can enable 
the continual experimentation needed to refine these systems. Even when operationalized, an 
architecture should continue to evolve. A mantra from the Aegis community is to “build a little, test 
a little, learn a lot. ”168 
This experimentation must be connected to results. The future architecture must prioritize 
coverage of the lower latitudes for the Indo-Pacific region. This is not only a matter of scaling 
constellation sizes but of selecting a design that addresses priority regions earlier. It may be 
tempting to continue experimenting: to deploy endless technology demonstrations to design 
constellations optimized for global coverage on an ever-longer timeline. 
Three means to resist this temptation include designing constellations for graceful deployment, 
leveraging airborne underlays, and accelerating ground and data infrastructure development. The 
treasure obligated for these development efforts could be in vain if capability arrives late to need.
DEPLOY GRACEFULLY
Deployment phasing should define every requirement in a potential constellation. The forthcoming 
sensor architecture must prioritize persistent coverage of the Indo-Pacific region first and do so 
sooner. Amid theoretical debates over orbital planes, satellites, and coverage, it is important to ask 
when an architecture could generate persistent coverage of relevant regions, and when this might 
expand to global coverage. As emphasized previously, even if the final capabilities of two designs 
are identical, the way these capabilities phase in—how they deploy gracefully and which regions 
receive denser coverage—can differ.

=== page 90 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  77
These considerations should impact the orbital design of forthcoming constellations. High-inclination 
configurations, optimized for maximizing coverage efficiencies once fully populated, may generate 
minimal relevant coverage when only partially populated. The recent nods to lower-inclination orbits 
in Tranche 2 are an important step to moderate polar over-coverage. It is worth asking if it is enough.
Figure 66: Regional and Global Coverage Definitions Investigated
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
AN AIRBORNE UNDERLAY
To this end, it will be crucial to examine alternatives for accelerating Indo-Pacific sensor coverage. A 
high-inclination LEO constellation will not generate persistent regional coverage for some time. But 
the immediate future fight is likely to be a regional fight (Figure 66). Airborne sensors might be useful 
for nearer-term regional tracking capability, defending critical assets including Okinawa or Guam. 
“Schedule is king. The train is going to leave the station on time.”
—Frank Turner, Technical Director, Space Development Agency169
Such approaches have been shown to be operationally viable. Architectures based on uncrewed 
aerial systems (UAS) have already been proposed for persistent, regional boost-phase missile 
defense missions, leveraging similar sensors needed for hypersonic tracking.170 MDA has previously 
demonstrated infrared missile tracking sensors on UAS, successfully tracking ballistic missiles 
in flight.171 In 2016 and 2021, the Navy and Army successfully integrated fighter-derived tracking 
information into missile defense tests.172 
The DoD has already begun to use decommissioned RQ-4 drones to track hypersonic systems in 
flight tests.173 There is an even larger stock of existing UAS, slated for divestment, which could be 
leveraged.174 Many pieces of the puzzle are already in place. 
In the longer term, advances in airborne platform endurance, networking, stealth, and 
autonomy could enable alternative designs. Opportunistic missile tracking could be invigorated 

=== page 91 ===
Getting on Track  |  78
by multimission platforms tightly linked to missile defense fire control networks.175 New domain 
awareness systems could allow asset placements closer to suspected missile launch sites.176 
Significant investments in lighter-than-air and ultra-long-endurance aircraft, combined with 
declines in infrared sensor size, weight, and power, could allow a proliferated architecture of 
smaller, lighter, and cheaper airborne sensors.177
Airborne systems offer different characteristics—flexibility, proximity, and survivability—to backstop 
and enhance a space-based missile tracking architecture. Introducing opportunistic or persistent 
airborne sensors increases the complexity of the missile defense problem for an adversary, forcing 
them to consider multiple domains from which their missiles could be tracked and engaged. 
Figure 67: Airborne Sensors near Guam
A notional laydown of airborne sensors defending Guam, involving two surface-based sensor assets and three long-endurance 
UAS—two in a combat air patrol, and one transiting to replenish the orbit.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.

=== page 92 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  79
To be clear, these architectures are not without their limitations. Their comparatively low altitudes 
constrain their lines of sight compared to spacecraft and, like space architectures, would require 
fleets of multiple systems to achieve persistence. They are not invulnerable—both aircraft and their 
airbases can be attacked by aircraft, missiles, and drones if placed close enough to threat regions.178 
As the DoD races ahead with space sensor acquisition, it is worth considering the roles airborne 
sensors might play in accelerating capability delivery to the Indo-Pacific (Figure 67). Persistent 
airborne sensors might relax schedule pressure on space systems and allow for designs that phase 
capability later. More critically, a diversity of assets in space and in the air—in different orbits and with 
different mixes of penetrating capability and persistence—generates more dilemmas for adversaries.
REDUCING INTEGRATION RISKS
Phasing capability earlier also demands more attention to the systems that allow them to 
interoperate. A constellation design will live and die by its data transport and integration. If history 
is any indication, the delivery of software and ground systems will be difficult, costly, and late.179 
“What you don’t want to have, ” General James Dickinson of U.S. Space Command warns, “is 
where you have outdated ground stations that can’t leverage the new capabilities on orbit. ”180 The 
development of these systems was a substantial contributor to the Space Based Infrared System 
(SBIRS) program’s early cost and schedule overruns; it is likely that ground system development, 
especially related to sensor fusion, will only mature after satellites have reached orbit.181 Both 
Congress and the DoD have roles to play in mitigating this risk.
Fusing sensor outputs from air and space platforms in multiple orbital bands is no easy 
undertaking. Efforts to develop common ground systems for the forthcoming Next Generation 
Overhead Persistent Infrared (OPIR) and Resilient Missile Warning/Missile Tracking (RMW/MT) 
constellations, for example, face considerable technical and schedule risk.182 A viable sensor fusion 
solution must correlate information from multiple sensors with different look angles, latencies, 
and uncertainties associated with their sensor returns to form a track.183 While some portion of this 
processing can be done on board satellites—“on the edge”—significant track correlation and fusion 
will likely initially take place on the ground (Figure 68). 
A constellation design will live and die by its data transport 
and integration. 
As of 2023, the DoD plans to manage the ground operations for RMW/MT through a combined 
program office including Space Systems Command (SSC), which will acquire the MEO component; 
SDA, which will acquire the Tracking Layer; and MDA, which retains considerable equities through 
HBTSS and the Missile Defense System (MDS). The ground components for each system are under 
development by different contractors and must interface with satellites from many vendors. 
Their software must correctly interface with the Next Generation OPIR Future Operationally 
Resilient Ground Evolution (FORGE) infrastructure and be compliant with the broader Space Force 
Enterprise Ground System (EGS). 
=== page 93 ===
Getting on Track  |  80
Still in its initial iterations, RMW/MT and Next Generation OPIR constellations will leverage different 
data formats, requiring “translation” on the ground to be interoperable.184 The RMW/MT ground 
segment itself involves separate infrastructure for the LEO Tracking Layer, MEO constellation, and 
HBTSS, which come online on different timelines. 
The timelines for acquiring these translation capabilities will be tight. FORGE itself is expected 
to come online no earlier than 2025. A more comprehensive ability to command and control 
multiple types of satellites with a single protocol, EGS, is required to enter service before 2028.185 
Responsibility for ensuring an integrated space architecture—such as by mandating common data 
standards and software development practices—has been dispersed across multiple program 
elements and offices. Despite clear road maps for launching large volumes of new satellites, no 
comprehensive plans have been publicized for fusing their large volumes of data.
The DoD has only recently begun algorithm development to fuse two-dimensional sensor tracks 
from OPIR satellites.186 While it has demonstrated the performance of its sensors on the ground, 
sensor track fusion remains a substantial software challenge. As deployment of the Tranche 0 
satellite constellation continues, the DoD must ensure that the sensor fusion approaches it leverages 
are scalable to larger quantities of satellites.187 
Figure 68: Data Transport Pathways
Data transport, fusion, and integration will be as important to space-based missile tracking as the sensors themselves.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
It will be imperative to get ahead of these integration problems. How many hops must the data 
take between sensors, ground stations, and other data processing nodes? How long might each 
hop take? Which nodes will process the tracking data, which will fuse them, and which will deliver 

=== page 94 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  81
the finalized track to an effector? The various types and orbits of satellites being purchased should 
output common data formats that are usable across various ground assets. Moreover, the DoD 
should take steps to mitigate cases where fusion-related program elements lack clear organizational 
ownership—a substantial contributor to past schedule overruns. 
The pace of the threat, and the pace of ongoing launch schedules, is too fast to accommodate any 
potential delays in sensor fusion and ground system development. Moreover, the DoD cannot settle 
for uncertain assurances that, someday, satellites in different orbits and with different datalinks 
could be integrated down the road. It will not be enough to continually experiment with fusion 
approaches once the satellites reach orbit. To deploy a diverse, proliferated constellation, it is 
essential for the ground systems and software to arrive on time. 
Temptation to Consolidate 
Finally, the future sensor architecture must be designed for conflict: it must be capable of surviving 
and reconstituting in highly contested environments. Achieving this will require an orbitally 
diverse constellation design that forces adversaries to develop many types of countermeasures. 
Policymakers should resist temptations to consolidate the sensor architecture into a single 
orbital regime.
Multi-orbit capabilities are not duplicative. An architecture in multiple orbits and altitudes can 
generate unique efficiencies in coverage unachievable with single-altitude architectures—especially 
for the Indo-Pacific region.188 Moreover, it will be critical to deploy diverse orbits to ensure resilience 
against growing counterspace threats. 
Amid future programmatic and budgetary pressures, it may be tempting to consolidate a sensor 
architecture to a single set of orbits in the low, medium, geosynchronous, or highly elliptical 
domains. In the past, the DoD has overly consolidated certain capabilities in a single orbital domain, 
such as GEO. That practice should not be repeated.189 The DoD’s pivot toward a multi-altitude sensor 
architecture is an important step in resisting this temptation. 
“What we’re finding is that resilience has no end state.”
—John Plumb, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space Policy190
Orbital diversity has become especially critical in view of the growing counterspace threat. 
Adversaries recognize the importance of space sensor architectures and are rapidly advancing 
their counterspace capabilities.191 In the past five years, they have conducted over 70 counterspace 
and anti-satellite (ASAT) weapon tests, developmental demonstrations, and deployments (Figure 
69).192 They are developing kinetic direct-ascent and co-orbital ASAT weapons, non-kinetic dazzlers, 
jammers, and cyberweapons, and have magnified natural threats to satellites, generating space 
debris through weapons testing.193 The increasing complexity of these threatens to outpace the 
United States’ acquisition of satellite constellations. This should be a central consideration not only 
in the construction of satellites, but in the design of an architecture.194
=== page 95 ===
Getting on Track  |  82
Figure 69: Counterspace Developments, Tests, and Deployments, 2006–2022
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with data from Aerospace Security Project.
Different orbital regimes are vulnerable to different threat profiles. The LEO environment is easier 
to threaten but also easier to proliferate and reconstitute. MEO offers coverage and distance 
but with harsh radiation environments and challenging unit economics. GEO, meanwhile, is 
increasingly populated with adversary co-orbital capabilities but benefit from both distance and 
potential defensive capabilities—making them far from “juicy targets. ”195 HEO regimes incorporate 
few assets but can be challenging to covertly engage with co-orbital weapons. No specific 
constellation design represents an ideal survivability profile.
A survivable constellation should therefore seek to multiply adversary dilemmas, forcing them to attack 
multiple orbital layers with multiple, costly means of attack. Assuring coverage will demand the use of 
air and space assets, the reconstitution of constellations under attack, and carefully planned defensive 
operations (Figure 70). It should leverage multiple approaches to resilience (Table 4). It is not merely a 
matter of proliferating sensors, but of doing so in ways that introduce additional targeting challenges. 

=== page 96 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  83
Table 4: Approaches to Resilience
Resilience 
approach Description Example
Disaggregation The separation of different 
capabilities into separate 
platforms
SATCOM; separate assets used for tactical 
and strategic communications; missile 
tracking and fire control sensors are on 
different platforms
Distribution The use multiple nodes to 
perform the mission of single 
node
GPS; GPS is a distributed service; multiple 
satellite nodes provide service
Diversification Leveraging multiple platforms 
in different orbits or domains
Chinese BeiDou satellite navigation 
system; use of GEO, HEO, and MEO orbits
Protection Use of active and passive 
measures to defend 
individual assets, including 
“jam protection and nuclear 
hardening . . . maneuverability, 
internally hosted decoys, 
and other on-board 
countermeasures”
SBIRS; SBIRS satellites are hardened 
against nuclear effects, jamming, and other 
space threats
Proliferation Expanding the number 
of platforms in a system; 
unlike distribution, focus on 
redundancy
SDA Proliferated Warfighter Space 
Architecture (PWSA); vision includes 
hundreds of satellites proliferated in LEO
Deception Concealing mission, capability, 
and robustness of satellites 
and payloads
National Geospatial Intelligence Agency 
satellites; the locations and missions 
of their satellites remain classified or 
concealed
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with data from the Department of Defense.196
Different orbits are suited to different resilience pathways. Constellations optimized for smaller 
numbers of assets—in GEO, for instance—benefit from resilience approaches that protect individual 
assets: advanced radiation hardening and error-correcting circuitry; larger fuel loads or refueling 
systems to perform evasive maneuvers; and signature reduction, chaff, and decoy systems.197 While 
some protection methods, such as the deployment of defensive “bodyguard” satellites, are costly, 
they can introduce novel operational considerations for an adversary.198 But it is unaffordable to 
ensure a resilient architecture through asset-level protection alone. 
These approaches should be combined with constellations that leverage different resilience 
philosophies. Several proposed LEO constellations leverage proliferation to ensure survivability. 
=== page 97 ===
Getting on Track  |  84
Figure 70: Mission Assurance Contributors
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project with data from the Department of Defense.199
Dramatic drops in the cost of space launch have made it feasible to rapidly proliferate and 
reconstitute satellites—and to do so more cheaply than they can be shot down.200 
Proliferation strategies are attractive for their potential to complicate adversary targeting and 
introduce new technology increments rapidly.201 Such satellites could be constructed to minimize 
unit cost, with lower reliability thresholds, commercial-grade electronics, and shorter orbital 
lifespans, to be replenished frequently with upgraded systems.202 
Systemic threats, however, challenge efforts to achieve resilience through proliferation. A sustained 
counterspace campaign would likely generate large quantities of debris in crowded LEO orbits. 
Nuclear explosions in space could deny large swathes of the LEO environment. Cyberattacks remain 
an omnipresent area threat, both for proliferated and exquisite architectures. The threat posed by 
these area effects makes it more urgent to embrace multiple resilience strategies.
Increasing the number of orbital regimes in the sensor architecture can enhance system-level resilience. 
Leveraging multiple orbital regimes complicates an adversary’s ability to exploit failure modes common 
to that orbit. LEO constellations benefit from large numbers, but their proximity to Earth makes them 
vulnerable to aforementioned area threats. MEO, GEO, and HEO constellations, meanwhile, might 
involve fewer assets with less provision for replenishment but are more difficult to engage with some 
directed-energy and direct-ascent weapons and potentially more economical to harden.
More critically, a multi-orbit architecture can complicate adversary mission planning. Adversaries 
facing such an architecture would encounter challenges in synchronizing attacks. A direct-ascent 
or co-orbital attack on MEO or GEO assets may take substantially longer to execute compared to 
attacks on LEO. If attacks were launched simultaneously, the earlier disruption to LEO layers would 
give warning time for MEO and higher satellites to employ defensive maneuvers or other measures. 
If attacks were phased to strike multiple orbits at once, the long transit time of co-orbital weapons 
or missiles in GEO or HEO would offer warning time for defensive measures in MEO or LEO. A 
diverse architecture both creates targeting dilemmas and complicates tactical surprise.
“I don’t want to be in any one orbit. . . . I want us to be as widely distributed over as many 
choices of orbital regimes as we can effectively use, because I want to pose the adversary 
such a difficult problem that they’ll choose not to fight it.”
-Michael Griffin, Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering, 2018203

=== page 98 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  85
The future sensor architecture cannot be a monoculture. Wartime scenarios are likely to include 
targeted attacks on individual satellites and area threats that threaten many. An architecture reliant 
on a single orbit and optimized for a single resilience philosophy will be simpler for adversaries 
to counter than a multi-layer approach, which presents dramatically different vulnerabilities. The 
increasing importance of space sensing makes it imperative to avoid so-called “common mode 
failures. ”204 A future missile tracking constellation cannot only be proliferated, it must leverage a 
diversity of sensors to complicate adversary targeting.
=== page 99 ===
Getting on Track  |  86
7
Staying on Track
M
issiles are no longer niche weapons, they are weapons of choice.205 They have become 
“foundational to our adversaries’ way of war, and missile defense has become foundational 
to integrated deterrence and the defense of the nation. ”206 The creation of a new elevated 
sensor architecture will be similarly foundational to the future missile defense enterprise. 
Over the last 40 years, seven successive presidential administrations have expressed support, at 
least on paper, for fielding a space sensor layer capable of providing not just missile warning but 
also high-quality tracking capabilities necessary to support the missile defense mission. To date, 
none has yet done so. 
That is now beginning to change. Substantial strides have been made toward a robust space sensing 
capability. That past vision has never been closer to realization than it is today. Breakthroughs in 
space launch, networking, and sensing technologies have created opportunities for realizing a 
robust elevated sensor architecture. Substantial institutional attention is now being paid across 
the U.S. national security enterprise, with significant investments to match. Recent emphasis on 
acquiring proliferated low Earth orbit (pLEO) constellations was a good start, but contending with 
near peers will require much more. As emphasized by Assistant Secretary of Defense John Plumb, 
“Resilience is kind of a never-ending quest. ”207 To achieve robust capability and mission assurance, 
the future sensor architecture must orbit in multiple altitudes and domains, prioritize designs that 
deploy sooner, and provide denser coverage of latitudes for the Indo-Pacific region. 
The necessary policy, programs, and institutions are in place. What is needed now is the oversight, 
resourcing, and systems engineering authority to make the future architecture resilient, timely, and 
=== page 100 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  87
capable. To be resilient, the future architecture must be orbitally diverse. To be timely, it must deploy 
capability with an eye to graceful deployment and to prioritizing lower-latitude coverage. Finally, it 
must deliver the quality of data necessary for missile defense—fire control-quality tracking. 
This long-awaited elevated sensor architecture will be achieved. When it is, its uses will extend well 
beyond missile warning, missile defense, and missile defeat. Indications, warnings, and attributions 
from these assets will bring clarity to decisionmakers in crisis situations and better inform and protect 
servicemembers in the field. Just as the Global Positioning System (GPS) has had countless commercial 
applications and the Defense Support Program missile warning constellations have benefited wildfire 
detection, new missions and use cases will emerge for these elevated sensors as well.208
The implications of space becoming a warfighting domain will not be fully understood for some time. 
It is, however, already clear that elevated sensing is critical for air and missile defense. As the number 
of exotic space threats continues to multiply, there is a risk of neglecting the seemingly pedestrian air 
and missile threats below. As tempting as it may be to deprioritize the missile defense mission, the 
requirement for fire control-quality tracking must not be abdicated. It must stay on track. 
=== page 101 ===
Getting on Track  |  88
Appendix
This report used Systems Toolkit (STK), SMARTSet, and other simulation and visualization tools 
to inform its analysis. The modeling performed is notional and intended to illustrate concepts and 
tradeoffs involved with sensor architecture design. To better highlight these, the team constrained 
the parameters being investigated in its analysis. The design of an operational architecture would 
involve higher-fidelity modeling for cost, maintenance interval, solar activity, hardening, launch 
schedules and missile design, conjunction, link budgets, and many other parameters. In brief, these 
models are demonstrative, not prescriptive. They are not reference architectures but exhibits for 
the design tradeoffs involved.  
Sensor-Level Analysis
The research team performed infrared sensor and signature analysis using STK’s Electro-optical 
Infrared (EOIR) module. Infrared background data was imported from the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration’s (NASA) Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) gridded data sets 
and processed with Python and NASA Panoply software. The team modeled a notional hypersonic 
glide vehicle (HGV) (Figure 4) with Autodesk Fusion 360 and applied temperature maps to vehicle 
surfaces in Blender, using open-source surface temperature estimates.209 These assets were then 
placed into the STK simulation environment (Figure 4).
Tracking hypersonic signatures is challenging because hypersonic weapons are not often the 
brightest objects in the scene. These weapons often appear as a single, slightly brighter pixel in a 
4,000-by-4,000 pixel, wide-field-of-view (WFOV) image; while detectable by machine, these raw 
=== page 102 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  89
images are difficult to interpret with the naked eye. The infrared images furnished in this report are 
specifically scoped and processed to make these challenges visible. 
Figure 10 illustrates challenges associated with isolating hypersonic signatures from background 
clutter. The series of images are derived from STK’s EOIR simulation suite and picture an HGV as 
seen from a low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite orbiting at 1000 km. The raw image (left) represents a 
“crop” of a potential WFOV sensor, with a resolution of 256-by-256 pixels and a per-pixel FOV of 
450 microradians. The simulated sensor operates in the mid-wave infrared (MWIR) band, with a 
wavelength of between 3.5 and 5 microns. The band selected is illustrative; various bands in the 
short- and mid-wave regions present different advantages. Radiometric features, including noise 
equivalent irradiance, were minimized to the degree the HGV could be distinguished. 
The first image depicts the raw output of this sensor. Unlike with bright plumes in the boost phase, 
the pixel containing the hypersonic weapon is dim—it is not among the brightest in the scene and 
cannot be distinguished with the naked eye. The brightness difference caused by the hypersonic 
weapon cannot easily be resolved by observing a single frame. 
Visualizing the signature instead requires analysis of several frames with the hypersonic weapon 
in motion. By estimating the movement of each pixel across the frame, it is possible to filter the 
hypersonic weapon’s motion from other objects in the scene. The second image depicts the 
motion vectors of each pixel over 20 successive image frames, processed with the OpenCV library’s 
Farneback optical flow algorithm.210 The false-color image encodes the optical flow vector of 
each pixel with a separate color, depicting a color variation for the pixel containing the moving 
hypersonic weapon. The third image displays an enlarged version of this false-color image, with 
contrast adjustments applied to make the HGV pixel more visible.
The resultant images are illustrative and do not depict operationally sensitive features of hypersonic 
tracking systems. An operational system would offer substantially greater performance headroom.211 
Moreover, atmospheric conditions can substantially change the signature of a vehicle; these were 
left to the standard atmospheric and cloud models included with STK EOIR. Finally, the simulations 
did not use high-fidelity maps of the hypersonic vehicle’s surface temperatures. A real hypersonic 
weapon would have significant temperature gradients across its surface and generate a wake of 
superheated gas and plasma with unique infrared emissivity characteristics. A weapons engineering 
process would include these detailed parameters, but these are not necessary to illustrate the 
principles discussed. 
Figure 7 illustrates the thermal gradient on a hypersonic weapon’s surface. To make these 
characteristics visible to the reader, the HGV was imaged from an uncrewed aerial system (UAS) 
placed approximately 80 km away with a 256-pixel focal plane array (FPA), 35 cm aperture, and a 
tight, 0.01-degree total FOV. This is not representative of an operational system but best illustrates 
the concept being discussed.
Similarly, Figure 25 is constructed to illustrate the effects of motion blur and sensor jitter. The 
sensor FPA is 256 pixels, with an 0.001-degree FOV, placing the HGV signature in the center of the 
=== page 103 ===
Getting on Track  |  90
image. The FPA has an integration time of 10 milliseconds and the final image includes this signature 
with an added 0.005mrad jitter. Figure 24 uses apertures of various sizes from geosynchronous orbits 
to illustrate how aperture affects sensor resolution. Again, sensor resolution and immediate field 
of view (IFOV) are left to generic parameters intended to highlight the impact of aperture size. The 
largest aperture is set to an arbitrarily large diameter of 10 m, while the two successive apertures, 60 
cm and 30 cm, show the progression in resolution with smaller, more realistic diameters. 
Constellation-Level Analysis
The research team also used STK to assess satellite constellation design tradeoffs. Constellation 
designs illustrated in the report were similarly selected to highlight design principles—inclination, 
orbital altitude, sensor FOV, and orbital configurations—and their impact on sensor coverage. 
Specifically, the report displays constellation designs evaluated for their two-satellite (stereo) 
coverage, which is necessary for missile tracking and fire control. 
Several visualizations directly depict real-life constellation designs. Figure 38 leverages data from 
the Space Force’s catalog of tracked space objects to define the orbits of Space Based Infrared 
System (SBIRS) and Defense Support Program (DSP) satellites. The coverage figures depict the 
maximum coverage footprints possible from each satellite. The latest and final SBIRS satellite, SBIRS 
GEO-6, was not included in this visualization. Similarly, Figures 59, 60, 61, 62, and 63 depict the 
Tranche 0, 1, and 2 constellation designs being contemplated. 
Other visualizations contain notional constellation designs produced through optimization studies. 
The project team leveraged various approaches to find configurations that minimized the number 
of satellites needed for stereo coverage of a given area. These studies also produced configurations 
of near-minimum constellation designs inspired by numbers publicly given for forthcoming 
constellations (Figure 27) (Tracking Layer, RMW/MT-MEO).
These optimization studies draw from the considerable literature written on the subject.212 Many 
of the configurations investigated in these studies were Walker or modified Walker configurations 
with different parameters on inter-plane spacing. Walker constellations are a family of constellation 
designs that distribute satellites in equally spaced, equally inclined circular orbits. Such a design 
is attractive to mission designers because of the stability of their geometry: the forces that perturb 
satellite orbits (such as those associated with atmospheric drag, the non-uniform nature of 
Earth’s gravitational field, and the Sun and Moon’s gravity, among others) affect all satellites in 
the constellation approximately equally. This symmetric design allows satellite operators to plan 
similar station-keeping maneuvers for all satellites in the system, giving them approximately equal 
operational lifetimes. Walker configurations are common among operational position, navigation, 
and timing (PNT) satellite constellations, such as the European Space Agency’s Galileo satellite 
system. Other satellite constellations, such as the U.S. Space Force’s Global Positioning System (GPS) 
or Iridium Communication’s constellation, use adaptations of the Walker constellation design. 
Walker constellations can be described by six parameters: semi-major axis, the number of orbital 
planes, the number of satellites per plane, the relative phasing between satellites in adjacent 
=== page 104 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  91
planes, the spacing between planes, and the planes’ inclination. For circular orbits—which have 
an eccentricity of zero—the constellation can also be described by the orbiting altitudes of its 
satellites, which stays constant over the course of the satellites’ orbital period. The coverage of such 
a constellation is also affected by a seventh, eighth, and ninth parameter: the field of regard (FOR) 
of the sensor on board, requirements for stereo or greater coverage, and solar exclusion, which 
defines angles where a sensor’s view is degraded by the light of the Sun in the background. 
These parameters must be tuned to minimize the number of satellites needed for persistent stereo 
coverage: coverage by two or more satellites at once, at every point in time, in the relevant region of 
analysis. The study team primarily analyzed coverage of a global region and a smaller, Indo-Pacific-
focused region between 15 degrees South and 55 degrees North latitude (Figure 66). To preserve 
the generalizability of the study, these analyses assumed a maximum possible FOR for each satellite 
constellation; higher-fidelity details of detection and characterization challenges are not addressed; and 
the results presented in the following two sections correspond only to line-of-sight coverage analysis. 
To evaluate possible designs, the research team leveraged STK’s Analyzer module to test millions of 
possible configurations for coverage. This analysis began with the construction of simplified, non-
representative designs for every orbital altitude to exemplify the altitude trades at play (Figure 34).
To construct this relationship, the study team used STK Analyzer’s Design of Experiments (DOE) 
tool to explore an entire swath of design possibilities. The model was simplified to assess simplified 
stereo coverage to minimize the computation time needed, with no constraints on solar exclusion. 
More detailed assessments, including constraints on sensor FOR, solar exclusion, and other factors, 
were performed for the other constellations visualized in this study.
The DOE tool parametrically defines a series of Walker Delta constellations by systematically 
combining ranges of orbital altitudes, numbers of orbital planes, numbers of satellites per plane, 
and inclinations, evaluating their suitability for stereo coverage using user-determined “Coverage 
Definitions” and “Figures of Merit. ”213 This study relied on a global coverage definition consisting 
of a grid of points, spaced by six degrees, positioned 20 km above the Earth’s surface. Under 
these definitions, coverage can be evaluated at each of the points in the coverage grid, which are 
separated from one another by six degrees in both latitude and longitude space. 
These studies defined successful stereo coverage by constellations’ ability to minimize average 
stereo coverage gap time to zero. That is, the number of seconds over a one-day study period—
during which any point in the coverage region is observed by fewer than two satellites in the 
constellation—cannot be greater than zero. When satellite constellations achieve continuous stereo 
coverage for a particular region, this figure of merit requirement is satisfied. 
For each orbital altitude between 500 and 36,000 km, the team evaluated hundreds of thousands 
of permutations of Walker Delta constellations. Although many different constellation architectures 
satisfied the figure of merit requirement—as many overpopulated satellite constellations offer 
much denser coverage than what is required—only two constellations per altitude met this study’s 
definition for optimality: one that offers continuous stereo coverage while minimizing the total 
=== page 105 ===
Getting on Track  |  92
number of satellites in the system, 
and one that offers continuous stereo 
coverage while minimizing the total 
number of orbital planes in the system.
Optimal constellations were identified 
algorithmically by first sorting the 
list of Walker Delta constellation 
permutations for each altitude by 
average stereo coverage gap times and 
removing those with non-zero times. 
This step eliminates those constellation 
architectures that fail to satisfy the 
figure of merit requirement. Next, the 
minimum total number of satellites 
and minimum total number of orbital planes of the remaining constellation architectures should be 
identified and noted. To identify the optimal constellation—minimizing the total number of satellites—
the architectures with more than the minimum total number of satellites should be removed. 
In many cases, there is more than one constellation architecture in the filtered list that offers the 
minimum total number of satellites. To select a singular, unique architecture, the list was filtered 
to include only those architectures that also use the minimum number of orbital planes. This 
is because multiple launches are generally needed to populate multiple orbital planes. All else 
being equal, a constellation of many planes with fewer satellites per plane is more costly than a 
constellation of fewer planes with more satellites in each.
Where needed, the list of remaining constellation architectures was sorted by inclination, and the 
design with the lowest inclination was labeled as most optimal, as less-inclined orbits generally 
correspond to lower launch costs.214 The process for identifying constellations that minimized the 
number of orbital planes is similar to the process described for minimizing the total number of 
satellites, but the list of architectures that satisfy the figure of merit requirement should first be 
filtered to only include those with the minimum number of orbital planes, then again filtered to only 
include those with the minimum number of total satellites—a reversal of the previously described 
order of operations. 
The resultant constellation configurations, and the total numbers of satellites they represent, were 
graphed using the Python Plotly library. The resultant figure (Figure 34) illustrates the results of this 
optimization study conducted for every altitude between 500 and 36,000 km at 50 km increments. The 
study team applied a minor smoothing function to interpolate between these increments and highlight 
the underlying relationship between altitude and the number of satellites required for coverage.
An operational constellation configuration, however, must account for more detailed constraints on 
performance. Each satellite in a constellation can be assumed to encounter some time where their 
As with handheld cameras, a space-based infrared camera angled close 
enough to the sun will encounter washout and flaring effects. This can 
inhibit the detection of dim targets.  
Source: CSIS Missile Defense Project.
Figure 71: Solar Exclusion
=== page 106 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  93
sensors may be unavailable, either during calibration or during periods where the Sun is sufficiently 
close to the sensor background (solar exclusion) (Figure 71). These can considerably increase the 
number of satellites required to develop a constellation design. 
As such, reference constellations, including Figures 16, 17, 27, 28, 35, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 51, 52, 
53, and 54, are optimized with constraints on solar exclusion. The total FOR of each sensor was 
modeled to provide the maximum footprint attainable. LEO reference constellations, all modeled 
at 1,000 km altitude, were conservatively modeled with a 30-degree solar exclusion parameter.215 
MEO constellations, at 7,000 and 10,000 km altitudes, were modeled with a 16-degree solar 
exclusion parameter. This adds a 30-degree angle outside the sensor FOR where the presence of 
the Sun would inhibit sensor function. These figures are intentionally arbitrary and not reflective of 
operational systems. 
The larger number of parameters required different approaches for discovering optimal designs. 
Testing every possible configuration, as with the DOE studies informing Figure 34, required over 
800,000 simulation runs to analyze. To discover designs for reference constellations, the research 
team leveraged STK Analyzer’s built-in genetic optimization suite to find minimum possible designs. 
The use of the NGSA-II optimization algorithm reflects common practice in other constellation 
optimization studies.216 Using NGSA-II, STK Analyzer could automatically explore and test possible 
combinations of inclination, planes, satellites per plane, and other parameters, measuring their 
resultant impacts on coverage. This approach minimized the number of simulation runs needed to 
discover the frontier of possible optimal configurations. Of these, the study team manually selected 
configurations that minimized the number of orbital planes necessary. 
This series of more detailed optimization studies formed the basis for several of the satellite 
configurations and mixes presented. The LEO orbital plane included in Figures 46, 51, 52, 53, and 
54 represent the results of optimization studies performed for smaller coverage regions, of both the 
polar region above 55 degrees latitude and a regional, Indo-Pacific-focused band between -15 and 
55 degrees latitude. Other configurations, such as Figure 28, demonstrate the significantly larger 
numbers of satellites needed when the per-satellite FOR is reduced. Combinations of “optimal” 
coverage layers were then devised from the basis of these studies. While these configurations do not 
represent the optimal configuration of an operational architecture, they demonstrate constellation 
designs that could reasonably exemplify the orbital tradeoffs at hand. 
=== page 107 ===
Getting on Track  |  94
About the Authors
Masao Dahlgren is a fellow with the Missile Defense Project at the Center for Strategic and 
International Studies (CSIS), where he writes on missile defense, space, and emerging technologies 
issues. In addition to his writing, he has presented at the Hypersonic Weapons Systems Summit 
and Directed Energy Technology Symposium and appeared on Sky News, CNBC, and other 
programming. Prior to joining CSIS, he worked at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies, 
U.S. Department of Justice, and NVIDIA Corporation.
Tom Karako is a senior fellow with the International Security Program and the director of the 
Missile Defense Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), where he 
arrived in 2014. His research focuses on national security, missile defense, nuclear deterrence, and 
public law. In 2010–2011, he was an American Political Science Association congressional fellow, 
working with the professional staff of the House Armed Services Committee and the Subcommittee 
on Strategic Forces on U.S. strategic forces policy, nonproliferation, and NATO. Dr. Karako is also 
currently a fellow with the Institute for Politics and Strategy of Carnegie Mellon University. He 
received his PhD from Claremont Graduate University and his BA from the University of Dallas.
=== page 108 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  95
Endnotes
1 T om Karako, “The Missile Defense Review: Insufficient for Complex and Integrated Attack, ” Strategic 
Studies Quarterly 13, no. 2 (Summer 2019), https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/SSQ/documents/
Volume-13_Issue-2/Karako.pdf.
2 J ohn Plumb, “Missile Defense Strategy, Policies, and Programs, ” Statement before the Senate Armed 
Services Committee, 117th Cong., 2nd sess., May 18, 2022, https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/
media/doc/ASD%20Plumb%20SASC%20SF%20Missile%20Defense%20Written%20Statement%20-%20
May,18%202022_FINAL.pdf. 
3 M ary C. Fitzgerald, “Marshal Ogarkov and the New Revolution in Soviet Military Affairs, ” Defense Analysis 
3, no. 1 (March 1987): 3–19, doi:10.1080/07430178708405274; Edward C. Keefer, Harold Brown: Offsetting 
the Soviet Military Challenge 1977-1981, Secretaries of Defense Historical Series, vol. 9 (Washington, 
DC: Historical Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense, 2017), https://history.defense.gov/Portals/70/
Documents/secretaryofdefense/OSDSeries_Vol9.pdf; Benjamin S. Lambeth, Desert Storm and Its Meaning: 
The View from Moscow (Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 1992), https://www.rand.org/pubs/reports/R4164.html; 
Ian Williams and Shaan Shaikh, The Missile War in Yemen (Washington, DC: CSIS, 2020), https://www.
csis.org/analysis/missile-war-yemen; Mykhaylo Zabrodskyi et al., Preliminary Lessons in Conventional 
Warfighting from Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: February–July 2022 (London: Royal United Services 
Institute, 2022), https://rusi.org/explore-our-research/publications/special-resources/preliminary-
lessons-conventional-warfighting-russias-invasion-ukraine-february-july-2022; and Ian Williams, Putin’s 
Missile War: Russia’s Strike Campaign in Ukraine (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2023), https://www.
csis.org/analysis/putins-missile-war.  
4 “2 0230418 STR Hearing: FY24 Budget Request for Missile Defense and Missile Defeat Programs, ” 
YouTube video, posted by U.S. House Armed Services Committee, April 18, 2023, 01:39:30, https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=OvwI5-oGGO0; David Vergun, “Official Discusses Steps to Deter, Defeat Missile 
Threats, ” U.S. Department of Defense, April 19, 2023, https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/
=== page 109 ===
Getting on Track  |  96
Article/Article/3367914/official-discusses-steps-to-deter-defeat-missile-threats/; “U.S. Military Chiefs Say 
Increasing Ukraine’s Air-Defense Capability Most Urgent Critical Task, ” Radio Free Europe, April 21, 
2023, https://www.rferl.org/a/ukraine-bakhmut-drones-kyiv-russia-nato/32373294.html; “Secretary of 
Defense Lloyd J. Austin III Holds a Press Conference, ” U.S. Department of Defense, October 27, 2022, 
https://www.defense.gov/News/Transcripts/Transcript/Article/3202353/secretary-of-defense-lloyd-j-
austin-iii-holds-a-press-conference/; Jens Stoltenberg, “Doorstep Statement, ” NATO, October 12, 2022, 
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/opinions_208040.htm; and Adam Taylor, David Stern, and Alex 
Horton, “Ukraine says Patriot air defense system not destroyed, ” Washington Post, May 17, 2023, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/world/2023/05/17/patriot-ukraine-air-defense-war/.
5 Sandr a Erwin, “Is Space Sensor Layer the Pentagon’s next major space program?, ” Space News, October 
12, 2018, https://spacenews.com/is-a-space-sensor-layer-the-pentagons-next-space-program/; Tom 
Karako and Masao Dahlgren, Complex Air Defense: Countering the Hypersonic Missile Threat (Lanham, 
MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2022), https://www.csis.org/analysis/complex-air-defense-countering-
hypersonic-missile-threat; Wes Rumbaugh and Tom Karako, “Extending the Horizon: Elevated Sensors 
for Targeting and Missile Defense, ” CSIS, CSIS Briefs, September 27, 2021, https://www.csis.org/analysis/
extending-horizon-elevated-sensors-targeting-and-missile-defense/; David N. Miller, Jr., “United States 
Space Command’s Role as the Global Sensor Manager, ” Statement before the House Armed Services 
Committee, 118th Cong., 1st sess., April 18, 2023, https://armedservices.house.gov/sites/republicans.
armedservices.house.gov/files/USSPACECOM%20FY24%20Missile%20Defense%20Written%20
Statement.pdf; U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Report to Congress of the U.S.-
China Economic and Security Review Commission (Washington, DC: U.S.-China Economic and Security 
Review Commission, 2022), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2022-11/2022_Annual_Report_
to_Congress.pdf; Tom Karako, “Beyond the Radar Archipelago: A New Roadmap for Missile Defense 
Sensors, ” War on the Rocks, November 28, 2018, https://warontherocks.com/2018/11/beyond-the-radar-
archipelago-a-new-roadmap-for-missile-defense-sensors/; Shaan Shaikh, “The Air and Missile War in 
Nagorno-Karabakh: Lessons for the Future of Strike and Defense, ” CSIS, Critical Questions, December 
8, 2020, https://www.csis.org/analysis/air-and-missile-war-nagorno-karabakh-lessons-future-strike-and-
defense; and Williams, Putin’s Missile War.
6 K arako and Dahlgren, Complex Air Defense. 
7 U .S. Department of Defense, 2022 Missile Defense Review (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 
2022),  https://media.defense.gov/2022/Oct/27/2003103845/-1/-1/1/2022-NATIONAL-DEFENSE-
STRATEGY-NPR-MDR.PDF. 
8 Dir ector, Operational Test and Evaluation, FY 2019 Annual Report (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Defense, December 2019), https://www.dote.osd.mil/Portals/97/pub/reports/FY2019/
bmds/2019sensorsC2.pdf?ver=2020-01-30-115407-707. 
9 J ohn London, “Space Development Agency: Delivering Capabilities” (presentation, NDIA Space and 
Missile Defense Working Group, Online, January 27, 2022), https://ndiatvc.org/images/downloads/
SMDWG_January_2022/sda_overview_for_smdwg___27_jan_2022.pdf. 
10 W illiam R. Graham et al., Ballistic Missile Defense and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS) (Fort 
Belvoir, VA: Ballistic Missile Defense Organization Advisory Committee, November 1995). 
11 J ames Dickinson, “Strategic Landpower Dialogue: A Conversation with General James Dickinson” 
(presentation, Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, D.C., November 8, 2023), 
https://www.csis.org/analysis/strategic-landpower-dialogue-conversation-general-james-dickinson. 
12 K arako and Dahlgren, Complex Air Defense. 
13 Fr ank Turner, “Next Generation Space and Missile Defense Panel” (presentation, Space and Missile 
Defense Symposium, Huntsville, AL, August 11, 2021), https://smdsymposium.org/wp-content/
=== page 110 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  97
uploads/2021/08/14_Wed-1535-Panel-Nx-Gen-Turner.pdf.  
14 Gr aham et al., Ballistic Missile Defense and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS). James M. Inhofe 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023, Pub. L. No. 117–263 § 1657, 136 Stat. 2951 (2022), 
https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ263/PLAW-117publ263.pdf. 
15 Space Development Agency, “Space Development Agency: Delivering Capabilities” (presentation, Space 
Development Agency, Washington, DC, June 2023).
16 Office of the Secretary of Defense, Status of the Space Based Infrared System Program (Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Defense, 2005), https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB235/42.pdf; Choudary 
R. Bobba, “Measurements and Predictions of Vacuum Core Infrared Radiation from a Small Solid 
Propellant Rocket Exhaust Plume, ” in Targets, Backgrounds, and Discrimination, eds. G. H. Kelley and 
Joseph S. Accetta (Ann Arbor, MI: SPIE, 1991), 5, doi:10.1117/12.2300206; Qinglin Niu, Zhihong He, and 
Shikui Dong, “IR Radiation Characteristics of Rocket Exhaust Plumes under Varying Motor Operating 
Conditions, ” Chinese Journal of Aeronautics 30, no. 3 ( June 2017): 1101–14, doi:10.1016/j.cja.2017.04.003; 
Caroline Schweitzer et al., “Infrared Measurements of Launch Vehicle Exhaust Plumes, ” in Target and 
Background Signatures III, eds. Karin U. Stein and Ric Schleijpen (Warsaw, Poland: SPIE, 2017), 10, 
doi:10.1117/12.2278291; Frederick Simmons, Rocket Exhaust Plume Phenomenology (Washington, DC: 
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., 2000), doi:10.2514/4.989087; and Roger 
Teague, “SBIRS Transformational Capability” (presentation, Space and Missile Systems Center, Los 
Angeles, CA, November 30, 2006), https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB235/new54.pdf. 
17 Int erview with space systems engineer, July 2022.
18 T eague, “SBIRS Transformational Capability. ” 
19 Qinglin Niu et al., “Infr ared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle under Time-Varying Angles 
of Attack, ” Chinese Journal of Aeronautics 32, no. 4 (April 2019): 861–74, doi:10.1016/j.cja.2019.01.003.
20 J ason Sherman, “Hypersonic Weapons Can’t Hide from New Eyes in Space, ” Scientific American, January 18, 
2022, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/hypersonic-weapons-cant-hide-from-new-eyes-in-space/. 
21 H. J. Kramer, Observation of the Earth and Its Environment: Survey of Missions and Sensors, 4th ed. (Berlin, 
New York: Springer, 2002). 
22 Chr istopher Gettinger et al., “Weapon propulsion and maneuverability design advancements” 
(presentation, ACI National Summit on Hypersonic Weapons Systems, Washington, D.C., April 26, 2022). 
23 Thomas J. Horvath et al., “Remote observations of reentering spacecraft including the space shuttle 
orbiter” (presentation, IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT, 2013), https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/
citations/20130011566/downloads/20130011566.pdf.
24 Richar d Matlock (presentation, 2017 Missile Defense Small Business Programs Conference, Huntsville, 
AL, June 21, 2017), https://ndiatvc.org/images/downloads/2017_MDA_SB_Conference_Info/day1_briefing_2_
matlock.pdf. 
25 Space Development Agency, SDA Tranche 0 Tracking Layer Draft RFP: Attachment 3 - Tracking Layer 
T0 WFOV Technical Requirements Document (Washington, DC: Space Development Agency, May 2020), 
https://govtribe.com/file/government-file/attach-3-tracking-layer-t0-wfov-trd-draft-dot-xlsx.
26 G overnment Accountability Office, Missile Defense: Opportunity to Refocus on Strengthening Acquisition 
Management, GAO-13-432 (Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office, April 2013), https://
www.gao.gov/assets/gao-13-432.pdf; Space Based Infrared Systems Program Office, Space Based Infrared 
Systems (SBIRS) High Component Single Acquisition Management Plan (El Segundo, CA: Air Force, June 
2002); and Teague, “SBIRS Transformational Capability. ” 
=== page 111 ===
Getting on Track  |  98
27 Tim ur Alexeev, “Tracking Layer Force Multiplication Through Advanced Boresight Scheduling” 
(presentation, Space and Missile Defense Symposium, Huntsville, AL, August 9, 2023).
28 Sandr a Erwin, “Space Force to activate sensor on Wide-Field-of-View missile warning satellite, ” Space 
News, October 24, 2022, https://spacenews.com/space-force-to-activate-sensor-on-wide-field-of-view-
missile-warning-satellite/. 
29 Space Development Agency, SDA Tranche 0 Tracking Layer Draft RFP: Attachment 3 - Tracking Layer T0 
WFOV Technical Requirements Document.
30 K elley Sayler, “Hypersonic Missile Defense: Issues for Congress, ” Congressional Research Service, 
updated May 2, 2023, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11623/10. 
31 Ibid.
32 T eague, “SBIRS Transformational Capability. ”
33 Barr y Starr et al., “RVS Large Format Arrays for Astronomy, ” Proceedings of SPIE 9915, High Energy, 
Optical, and Infrared Detectors for Astronomy VII (2016), 99152X-1–14, doi:10.1117/12.2233033. 
34 I ain Boyd, “Opportunities for Hypersonic Vehicle Detection and Tracking” (presentation, Intelligence-
SEC Hypersonic Defense Conference, Huntsville, AL, November 8, 2023).
35 Ibid. 
36 Min- Yang Chou et al., “Ionospheric Disturbances Triggered by SpaceX Falcon Heavy, ” Geophysical 
Research Letters 45, no. 13 ( June 2018): 6334–42, doi:10.1029/2018GL078088; and Yoshihiro Kakinami 
et al., “Ionospheric disturbances induced by a missile launched from North Korea on 12 December 
2012, ” Journal of Geophysical Research Space Physics 118, no. 8 (August 2013): 5184–89, https://agupubs.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/jgra.50508. 
37 K arako and Dahlgren, Complex Air Defense. 
38 Airbus, Arrow Platform: Versatile by Design (Toulouse, France: Airbus, 2021), https://airbusus.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ARROW_Brochure-US-06.28.21.pdf; and William L. Melvin and James A. Scheer, 
eds., Principles of Modern Radar: Volume III: Radar Applications (Edison, NJ: SciTech Publishing, 2014).  
39 B oyd, “Opportunities for Hypersonic Vehicle Detection and Tracking, ” 15, 31. 
40 Pa ul Labbe, Ahmed Ghanmi, and Mohamed Abdelazez, Current and future hypersonic threats, scenarios, 
and defence technologies for the security of Canada (Ottawa, CA: Defence Research and Development 
Canada, March 2022), https://cradpdf.drdc-rddc.gc.ca/PDFS/unc385/p814591_A1b.pdf. 
41 P .D. Beaulne et al., “Preliminary Design of a SAR-GMTI Processing System for RADARSAT-2 MODEX Data, ” 
IGARSS 2003. 2003 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. Proceedings (IEEE 
Cat. No.03CH37477), vol. 2 (IGARSS 2003. 2003 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium. Proceedings, Toulouse, France: IEEE, 2003): 1019–21, doi:10.1109/IGARSS.2003.1293998; S. 
Chiu and M. V. Dragošević, “Moving Target Indication via RADARSAT-2 Multichannel Synthetic Aperture 
Radar Processing, ” EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing 2010, no. 1 (December 2009): 1–19, 
doi:10.1155/2010/740130; Chuck E. Livingstone et al., RADARSAT-2 System and Mode Description (Neuilly-
sur-Seine, France: 2006), https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA469927.pdf; and Hélène Oriot, Moving Target 
Detection on SAR Images (Brussels: NATO Science and Technology Organization, 2012), https://www.sto.
nato.int/publications/STO%20Educational%20Notes/STO-EN-SET-191-2014/EN-SET-191-2014-07.pdf.   
42 U .S. Department of Defense, 2022 Missile Defense Review (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 
2022), https://media.defense.gov/2022/Oct/27/2003103845/-1/-1/1/2022-NATIONAL-DEFENSE-STRATEGY-
NPR-MDR.PDF.
=== page 112 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  99
43 “R evolutionizing Infrared Sensing Could Transform Imaging Applications, ” Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency, September 2, 2022, https://www.darpa.mil/news-events/2022-09-02; A. Bouakka-
Manesse et al., “Space Activity and Programs at SOFRADIR, ” in Proceedings of SPIE 9981 (Planetary 
Defense and Space Environment Applications, SPIE, 2016), 74–92, doi:10.1117/12.2240657; Xavier 
Brenière, Laurent Rubaldo, and Frederic Dupont, “Sofradir’s Recent Improvements Regarding the 
Reliability and Performance of HgCdTe IR Detectors, ” in Proceedings of SPIE 9070 (Infrared Technology 
and Applications XL, Baltimore, MD: SPIE, 2014), 836–45, doi:10.1117/12.2051705; Erin N. Pettyjohn, 
“USAF Space Sensing Cryogenic Considerations, ” in Laser Refrigeration of Solids IV 7951 (Laser 
Refrigeration of Solids IV, SPIE, 2011), 7–16, doi:10.1117/12.878962; Christoph H. Grein, Final Report: U.S. 
Workshop on the Physics and Chemistry of II-VI Materials (a.k.a. II-VI Workshop) - ARO Research Area III: 
Materials Science - Physical Properties of Materials, W911NF-17-1–0545 (Chicago, IL: University of Illinois, 
2020), https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/AD1010420.pdf; Alexander R. Gurga et al., “Dual-Band MWIR/LWIR 
Focal Plane Arrays Based on III-V Strained-Layer Superlattices, ” in Infrared Technology and Applications 
XLIV 10624 (Infrared Technology and Applications XLIV, SPIE, 2018), 113–19, doi:10.1117/12.2309720; 
Antoni Rogalski, “Next decade in infrared detectors, ” Proceedings of SPIE 10433, Electro-Optical and 
Infrared Systems: Technology and Applications XIV 104330L (2017), doi:10.1117/12.2300779; Ronald 
G. Driggers, “New Infrared Systems, ” SPIE Professional Magazine, April 1, 2014, https://spie.org/news/
spie-professional-magazine-archive/2014-april/whats-new-in-infrared-systems?SSO=1; and Paul Jerram 
and James Beletic, “Teledyne’s High Performance Infrared Detectors for Space Missions” (presentation, 
International Conference on Space Optics, Chania, Greece, October 11, 2018).  
44 K aan Çelikbilek et al., “Survey on Optimization Methods for LEO-Satellite-Based Networks with 
Applications in Future Autonomous Transportation, ” Sensors 22, no. 4 ( January 2022): 1421, doi:10.3390/
s22041421; and James Richard Wertz and Wiley J. Larson, eds., Space Mission Analysis and Design, 3rd ed. 
(El Segundo, CA: Microcosm, 1999), https://dta0yqvfnusiq.cloudfront.net/tsti/2015/06/SMAD_Fronts.pdf. 
45 W alter Chai, “Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor (HBTSS)” (presentation, Military 
Hypersonic Weapon Systems Conference, Online, October 19, 2021). 
46 Ir v Blickstein et al., eds., Acquisition of Space Systems, Volume 7: Past Problems and Future Challenges (Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2015), 43 https://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG1171z7.html. 
47 Ir v Blickstein et al., eds., Acquisition of Space Systems, Volume 7: Past Problems and Future Challenges 
(Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2015), https://www.rand.org/pubs/monographs/MG1171z7.html; 
and Jeffrey T. Richelson, “Space-Based Early Warning: From MIDAS to DSP to SBIRS, ” National Security 
Archive, November 9, 2007, https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB235/index.htm.
48 Da vid C. Eccles, Susan E. Hastings, and Jeff B. Jaranek,  Effects on High-Volume Production (HVP) on Space 
Systems (Washington, DC: Aerospace Corporation, 2020), https://csps.aerospace.org/sites/default/
files/2021-08/Eccles-HPV-20200610.pdf.
49 I bid.; Adrienne Harebottle, “Satellite Manufacturing in the Era of Mass Production, ” Satellite 
Today, August 19, 2021, http://interactive.satellitetoday.com/via/september-2021/satellite-
manufacturing-in-the-era-of-mass-production/; Theresa Hitchens, “Millennium Drills down on 
3D Printing, as MEO Missile Tracking Effort Progresses, ” Breaking Defense, April 8, 2022, https://
breakingdefense.sites.breakingmedia.com/2022/04/millennium-drills-down-on-3d-printing-as-meo-
missile-tracking-effort-progresses/; Bhavya Lal et al., Global Trends in Small Satellites, IDA Paper, 
P-8638 (Washington, DC: Institute for Defense Analyses, 2017), https://www.ida.org/research-and-
publications/publications/all/g/gl/global-trends-in-small-satellites; John M. Olson et al., State of the 
Space Industrial Base 2022: Winning the New Space Race for Sustainability, Prosperity and the Planet, 
ed. Peter Garretson (Washington, DC: Defense Innovation Unit, 2022), https://assets.ctfassets.
net/3nanhbfkr0pc/6L5409bpVlnVyu2H5FOFnc/7595c4909616df92372a1d31be609625/State_of_the_
Space_Industrial_Base_2022_Report.pdf; Liz V. Stein, LEO Satcom (Cambridge, MA: Prime Movers Lab, 
=== page 113 ===
Getting on Track  |  100
2022), https://www.primemoverslab.com/resources/ideas/leo-satcom.pdf; Debra Werner, “Millennium 
Prepares for Mass Manufacturing, ” Space News, April 4, 2022, https://spacenews.com/millennium-mass-
manufacturing/; and Sasha Weston, ed., Small Spacecraft Technology State of the Art Report (Moffett 
Field, CA: NASA, 2021), https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20210021263. 
50 Thomas G. Roberts, “Space Launch to Low Earth Orbit: How Much Does It Cost?, ” Aerospace Security, 
CSIS, September 1, 2022, https://aerospace.csis.org/data/space-launch-to-low-earth-orbit-how-much-
does-it-cost/. 
51 Andr ew Turner, “Constellation Design Considerations for Smallsats, ” SSC16-P4-18, paper presented at 
29th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, 2015, https://s3vi.ndc.nasa.gov/ssri-kb/static/
resources/Constellation%20Design%20Considerations%20for%20Smallsats.pdf. 
52 “ UCS Satellite Database, ” Union of Concerned Scientists, updated January 1, 2023, https://www.ucsusa.
org/resources/satellite-database. 
53 N ational Research Council of the National Academies, Seeing Photons: Progress and Limits of Visible and 
Infrared Sensor Arrays (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2010), doi:10.17226/12896.
54 “E arth Observation System Using Geostationary Orbit Satellites, ” JAXA Research and Development 
Directorate, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, 2013, https://www.kenkai.jaxa.jp/eng/research/
observation/observation.html; and Tanya N. Harrison, “Introduction to the Planet Constellations of 
Satellites and Imagery” (presentation, online, 2019), https://assets.planet.com/docs/Planet101-NASA_
Goddard_Brown_Bag_Presentation.pdf. 
55 H. Philip Stahl, “Multivariable Parametric Cost Model for Ground and Space Telescope Assemblies, ” 
Bulletin of the AAS 51, no. 7 (2019), https://baas.aas.org/pub/2020n7i143/release/1. 
56 Chr istopher R. Boshuizen et al., “Results from the Planet Labs Flock Constellation” (AIAA/USU 
Conference on Small Satellites, Logan, UT: Planet Labs, 2014), 8; Jeffrey K. Harris and Gilbert Siegert, 
“Missile-Warning Augmentation: A Low-Risk Approach, ” Air & Space Power Journal, November 1, 2013, 
95–113, https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/ASPJ/journals/Volume-27_Issue-6/V-Harris-Siegert.
pdf; and Tom Segert, “Case Study: GEORG, ” LinkedIn, November 21, 2021, https://www.linkedin.com/
pulse/case-study-georg-tom-segert/.
57 Philip Chrystal, Darren McKnight, and Pamela L. Meredith, New Space, New Dimensions, New Challenges: 
How Satellite Constellations Impact Space Risk (Zurich, Switzerland: Swiss Re Corporate Solutions, 
2018), https://www.swissre.com/dam/jcr:8bb6ac1d-a158-4b46-b32e-903ae5f89964/how-satellite-%20
constellations-impact-space-risk.pdf; and Wertz and Larson, eds., Space Mission Analysis and Design.
58 Space Development Agency,  SDA Tranche 0 Tracking Layer Draft RFP: Attachment 3 - Tracking Layer T0 
WFOV Technical Requirements Document (Washington, DC: Space Development Agency, May 2020), 
https://govtribe.com/file/government-file/attach-3-tracking-layer-t0-wfov-trd-draft-dot-xlsx; and John 
E. Draim, “A Common-Period Four-Satellite Continuous Global Coverage Constellation, ” Journal of 
Guidance, Control, and Dynamics 10, no. 5 (1987): 492–99, doi:10.2514/3.20244.
59 Chr ystal et al., “New Space, New Dimensions, New Challenges. ”
60 J ohn Keller, “The Evolving World of Radiation-Hardened Electronics, ” Military & Aerospace Electronics, 
June 2, 2018, https://www.militaryaerospace.com/computers/article/16707204/the-evolving-world-of-
radiationhardened-electronics. 
61 Nicholas Eftimiades, Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security (Washington, DC: Atlantic 
Council, 2022), https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Small_satellites-
Implications_for_national_security.pdf.
=== page 114 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  101
62 Space Development Agency, “Space Development Agency: Delivering Capabilities. ”
63 B oshuizen et al., “Results from the Planet Labs Flock Constellation”; and Karen L. Jones and Geoffrey 
S. Reber, “Continuous Production Agility: Future-Proofing the National Security Space Enterprise, ” 
Aerospace Corporation, September 17, 2020, https://csps.aerospace.org/papers/continuous-production-
agility-cpa-future-proofing-national-security-enterprise. 
64 Sandr a Erwin, “Space Development Agency a huge win for Griffin in his war against the status quo, ” 
Space News, April 21, 2019, https://spacenews.com/space-development-agency-a-huge-win-for-griffin-in-
his-war-against-the-status-quo/. 
65 A udrey Decker, “Satellite Ground Stations are Vulnerable, US Warns, ” Defense One, April 4, 
2023, https://www.defenseone.com/threats/2023/04/sda-stresses-need-protect-satellites-ground-
stations/384786/. 
66 Dickinson, “Strategic Landpower Dialogue: A Conversation with General James Dickinson. ” 
67 “N uclear Effects Executive Overview, ” presentation, Missile Defense Agency Independent Scientific and 
Engineering Group, Fort Belvoir, VA, December 30, 2001; and John Parmentola et al., “High Altitude 
Nuclear Detonations (HAND) Against Low Earth Orbit Satellites (“HALEOS”)” (presentation, Defense Threat 
Reduction Agency, Fort Belvoir, VA, April 2001), https://spp.fas.org/military/program/asat/haleos.pdf.  
68 Nicholas Eftimiades, Small Satellites: The Implications for National Security (Washington, DC: Atlantic 
Council, May 2022), https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/Small_satellites-
Implications_for_national_security.pdf; and Shaun Waterman, “Space Development Agency Director 
Tasks Industry for Cyber Solutions, ” Via Satellite, May 17, 2022, https://www.satellitetoday.com/
cybersecurity/2022/05/17/space-development-agency-director-tasks-industry-for-cyber-solutions/. 
69 Michael McLain, “Radiation Effects in Electronics: From Basic Physics to Experimental and Simulation 
Capabilities” (presentation, DTRA University Alliance Monthly Seminar Series, November 30, 2021), 
https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/1900110.
70 Ed ward E. Conrad et al., Collateral Damage to Satellites from an EMP Attack, DTRA-IR-10-22 (Fort Belvoir, 
VA: Defense Threat Reduction Agency, 2010), https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ADA531197.pdf.
71 J ohn S. Foster, Jr. et al., Report of the Commission to Assess the Threat to the United States from 
Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Attack, (Washington, DC: U.S. Commission to Assess the Threat to the 
United States from Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Attack, 2008), https://permanent.fdlp.gov/LPS101707/
A2473-EMP_Commission-7MB.pdf. 
72 Independent Scientific and Engineering Group, “Nuclear Effects Executive Overview” (presentation, 
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, Ft. Belvoir, VA, 2001).
73 Ibid.
74 F oster et al., Report of the Commission to Assess the Threat to the United States from Electromagnetic Pulse 
(EMP) Attack, 159.
75 T ereza Pultarova, “SpaceX Starlink satellites had to make 25,000 collision-avoidance maneuvers in just 6 
months — and it will only get worse, ” Space.com, July 6, 2023, https://www.space.com/starlink-satellite-
conjunction-increase-threatens-space-sustainability. 
76 Ther esa Hitchens, “Debris from ASAT tests creating ‘bad neighborhood’ in low Earth orbit: Analyst, ” 
Breaking Defense, June 16, 2023, https://breakingdefense.com/2023/06/debris-from-asat-tests-creating-
bad-neighborhood-in-low-earth-orbit-analyst/. 
77 R obert “Tony” Vincent, “Getting Serious About the Threat of High-Altitude Nuclear Detonations, ” War 
=== page 115 ===
Getting on Track  |  102
On the Rocks, September 23, 2022, https://warontherocks.com/2022/09/getting-serious-about-the-
threat-of-high-altitude-nuclear-detonations/. 
78 St ephen Chen, “Chinese physicists simulate nuclear blast against satellites, ” South China Morning Post, 
October 20, 2022, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/science/article/3196629/chinese-physicists-
simulate-nuclear-blast-against-satellites. 
79 “ GPS Constellation, ” Navigation Center, U.S. Coast Guard, n.d., https://www.navcen.uscg.gov/gps-
constellation; and “Space Segment, ” GPS.gov, U.S. Space Force, June 28, 2022, https://www.gps.gov/
systems/gps/space/#generations. 
80 “S ATCAT, ” Space-Track.org, U.S. Space Force, n.d., https://www.space-track.org/#catalog. 
81 Timo A. Stein, C.S. Dyer, and E.G. Stassinopoulos, “Space, Atmospheric, and Terrestrial Radiation 
Environments, ” IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 50, no. 3 ( June 2003): 466–82, doi:10.1109/
TNS.2003.813131; and Yihua Zheng, “Space Weather Impacts on Satellites at Different Orbits” 
(presentation, June 2015), https://ccmc.gsfc.nasa.gov/RoR_WWW/SWREDI/2015/REDI2015_SWX_sat_
impacts_s.pdf. 
82 K eith A. Ryden et al., “Radiation Monitoring in Medium Earth Orbit over the Solar Minimum Period, ” 
Proceedings of RADECS 2008 ( Jyväskylä, Finland: September 2008), 7, https://lws-set.gsfc.nasa.gov/
documents/credance/Ryden_RADECS_2008.pdf; and Rebecca Smith-Bindman et al., “Radiation 
Dose Associated with Common Computed Tomography Examinations and the Associated Lifetime 
Attributable Risk of Cancer, ” Archives of Internal Medicine 169, no. 22 (December 14, 2009): 2078–86, 
doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2009.427.
83 NASA, Mitigating In-Space Charging Effects—A Guideline, NASA-HDBK-4002A (Washington, DC: NASA, 
2017), https://ccmc.gsfc.nasa.gov/RoR_WWW/SWREDI/2018/nasa-hdbk-4002a_revalidated.pdf.
84 Y ong Chang, Silviu Velicu, and Thomas Kroc, “Radiation Hardened Infrared Focal Plane Arrays, ” EPIR, 
August 2020, https://science.osti.gov/-/media/np/pdf/sbir-sttr/SBIR-STTR-2020/day-2/Chang_DoE_
Radiation_Hardened_FPA_and_Camera_Exchange_Meeting_202008_EPIR-Inc.pdf. 
85 G overnment Accountability Office, Missile Defense: Opportunity to Refocus on Strengthening Acquisition 
Management, GAO-13-432 (Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office, April 2013), https://www.
gao.gov/assets/gao-13-432.pdf. 
86 T om Bridgman, William D. Pesnell, and Rani Gran, “Halloween 2003 Solar Storms: SOHO/EIT 
Ultraviolet, 195 Angstroms, ” NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Scientific Visualization Studio, April 2, 
2008, updated November 12, 2023, https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/3500/#section_credits. 
87 R obert Baumann and Kirby Kruckmeyer,  Radiation Handbook for Electronics (Dallas, TX: Texas 
Instruments, 2019), www.ti.com/radbook. 
88 P eter Mehlitz and John Penix, “Expecting the Unexpected - Radiation Hardened Software, ” in  Infotech@
Aerospace (Infotech@Aerospace, Arlington, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 
2005), doi:10.2514/6.2005-7088.
89 NASA, Mitigating In-Space Charging Effects—A Guideline, NASA-HDBK-4002A; John Keller, “The Evolving 
World of Radiation-Hardened Electronics, ” Military & Aerospace Electronics, June 2, 2018, https://
www.militaryaerospace.com/computers/article/16707204/the-evolving-world-of-radiationhardened-
electronics; and Ray Ladbury, “Radiation Hardening at the System Level” (presentation, IEEE NSREC 
Short Course: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Radiation at the System Level, 2007), 95. 
90 C onrad et al., “Collateral Damage to Satellites from an EMP Attack. ”
91 C ongressional Budget Office, Large Constellations of Low-Altitude Satellites: A Primer (Washington, DC: 
=== page 116 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  103
Congressional Budget Office, May 2023), https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2023-05/58794-satellite-
primer.pdf. 
92 “Space -Launch, Orbital Insertion Engine and Launcher Re-Entry detected by SBIRS HEO-1, ” U.S. Air 
Force, 2007, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SBIRS-HEO-1_-_Observation_of_Space_Launch.
jpg; and “An Exclusive Look at SBIRS and its Capabilities, ” Aviation Week, October 16, 2015, https://
aviationweek.com/defense-space/space/exclusive-look-sbirs-its-capabilities. 
93 Gr aham et al., Ballistic Missile Defense and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS).
94 V irgil Labrador, “Satellite Communication, ” Encyclopedia Britannica, last updated October 6, 2023, 
https://www.britannica.com/technology/satellite-communication.  
95 F ederal Aviation Administration, The Annual Compendium of Commercial Space Transportation: 2018 
(Washington, DC: Federal Aviation Administration, 2018), https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/
headquarters_offices/ast/media/2018_ast_compendium.pdf; and Roberts, “Space Launch to Low Earth 
Orbit: How Much Does It Cost?”
96 K ari Bingen, Kaitlyn Johnson, Makena Young, and John Raymond, Space Threat Assessment 2023 
(Washington, DC: CSIS, April 2023), https://www.csis.org/analysis/space-threat-assessment-2023. 
97 “NCADE: An ABM AMRAAM: Or Something More?, ” Defense Industry Daily, November 20, 2008, https://
www.defenseindustrydaily.com/ncade-an-abm-amraam-03305/. 
98 “F -35 DAS and APG-81 radar for the JSF detect multiple rocket launches, ” YouTube video, posted by 
Northrop Grumman, June 21, 2012, 3:40, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qF29GBSpRF4. 
99 Ibid.
100 “N avy Conducts First Live Fire NIFC-CA Test with F-35, ” Naval Sea Systems Command, September 13, 
2016, https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article-View/Article/942188/navy-conducts-first-live-fire-
nifc-ca-test-with-f-35/; and Steve Trimble, “F-35 Teams Up With PAC-3 For Cruise Missile Kill, ” Aviation 
Week, July 15, 2021, https://aviationweek.com/defense-space/missile-defense-weapons/f-35-teams-pac-3-
cruise-missile-kill.
101 I an Williams and Masao Dahlgren, Boost-Phase Missile Defense: Interrogating the Assumptions 
(Washington, DC: CSIS, 2022), 19–22, https://www.csis.org/analysis/boost-phase-missile-defense. 
102 M atlock (presentation, 2017 Missile Defense Small Business Programs Conference). 
103 Tim Wright, “Could Drones Shoot Down ICBMs?, ” Air and Space Magazine, June 13, 2017, https://www.
smithsonianmag.com/air-space-magazine/could-drones-shoot-down-icbms-180963660/; Office of the 
Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 President’s Budget 
Submission, Missile Defense Agency Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide (Washington 
DC: Department of Defense, 2015), https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/
fy2016/budget_justification/pdfs/03_RDT_and_E/MDA_RDTE_MasterJustificationBook_Missile_Defense_
Agency_PB_2016_1.pdf; and Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), Department of 
Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 President’s Budget Submission, Missile Defense Agency Research, Development, 
Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide (Washington DC: Department of Defense, 2016), https://comptroller.
defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2017/budget_justification/pdfs/03_RDT_and_E/MDA_
RDTE_MasterJustificationBook_Missile_Defense_Agency_PB_2017_1.pdf; and Office of the Under Secretary 
of Defense (Comptroller), Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 Budget Estimates, Missile Defense 
Agency Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide (Washington DC: Department of Defense, 
2017), https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/FY2018/budget_justification/
pdfs/03_RDT_and_E/U_RDTE_MasterJustificationBook_Missile_Defense_Agency_PB_2018_Vol2a_Vol2b.pdf. 
=== page 117 ===
Getting on Track  |  104
104 Calcula tion based on Wertz and Larson, Space Mission Analysis and Design. Ground-based sensor 
assumed altitude: 6 m. 
105 Bar ton et al.,  Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for 
National Missile Defense: Scientific and Technical Issues (Washington, DC: American Physical Society, 
2004), https://journals.aps.org/rmp/pdf/10.1103/RevModPhys.76.S1; and Steven Fiorino, “Developing 
Directed Energy Weapons to Operate Across a Range of Atmospheric Conditions” (presentation, 5th 
Annual Directed Energy Symposium, National Harbor, MD, October 5, 2022).
106 “MQ -9 Reaper, ” U.S. Air Force, n.d., https://www.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/104470/
mq-9-reaper/; and “MQ-9B SkyGuardian, ” General Atomics Aeronautical Systems, n.d., https://www.ga-
asi.com/remotely-piloted-aircraft/mq-9b-skyguardian.
107 N ational Research Council, Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and 
Systems for U.S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives (Washington, DC: National 
Research Council, 2012), doi:10.17226/13189. 
108 Gr aham et al., Ballistic Missile Defense and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS).
109 Michael Griffin and Tom Karako, “Reenergizing the Missile Defense Enterprise, ” transcript, CSIS, 
Washington, DC, November 13, 2018, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/
event/181211_Transcript.pdf. 
110 Gar ima Aggarwal and Ramanan R V, “A Unified Approach for the Optimal Constellation Design of 
Satellites in Low-Earth Circular/Elliptical Orbits for Continuous Coverage, ” in AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum 
(AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum, Orlando, FL: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2020), 
doi:10.2514/6.2020-1915; Lake A. Singh et al., “Low Cost Satellite Constellations for Nearly Continuous 
Global Coverage, ” Nature Communications 11, no. 1 ( January 10, 2020): 200, doi:10.1038/s41467-019-
13865-0; Andrew E. Turner, “Constellation Design Considerations for Smallsats, ” in 29th Annual AIAA/
USU Conference on Small Satellites (Logan, UT, 2015), 14.
111 Space Development Agency, Tranche 1 Minimum Viable Product Request for Information Amendment 2, 
SDA-SN-21-0001 (Washington, DC: Space Development Agency, 2020), https://govtribe.com/opportunity/
federal-contract-opportunity/sda-tranche-1-minimum-viable-product-rfi-sdasn210001.
112 R yan Frigm, “DoD’s Space Development Agency Shows How Fast the FAR Can Be, ” in On DoD With Jared 
Serbu, produced by Federal News Network, podcast, transcript, 00:41:22, https://federalnewsnetwork.
com/on-dod/2020/11/dods-space-development-agency-shows-how-fast-the-far-can-be/. 
113 Obaid Younossi et al., Improving the Cost Estimation of Space Systems: Past Lessons and Future 
Recommendations (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2008), https://www.rand.org/pubs/
monographs/MG690.html. 
114 Space Development Agency, Proliferated Defense Space Architecture Tranche 2 Tracking Layer DRAFT 
Program Solicitation, SDA-PS-23-05 (Washington, DC: Space Development Agency, June 2023).
115 Depar tment of Defense, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Missile Defense 
Agency Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide (Washington DC: 2023), https://
comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2024/budget_justification/pdfs/03_RDT_
and_E/RDTE_Vol2_MDA_RDTE_PB24_Justification_Book.pdf. 
116 Ibid. 
117 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Air Force 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force (Washington DC: Department of Defense, 2023), 
https://www.saffm.hq.af.mil/Portals/84/documents/FY24/Research%20and%20Development%20
=== page 118 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  105
Test%20and%20Evaluation/FY24%20Space%20Force%20Research%20and%20Development%20
Test%20and%20Evaluation.pdf?ver=BQWN2ms9pfLNN_gvIz4mQQ%3d%3d; and Department 
of Defense, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Missile Defense Agency 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide; and Office of the Under Secretary of Defense 
(Comptroller), Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Space Development Agency 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2023), 
https://comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2024/budget_justification/pdfs/03_
RDT_and_E/RDTE_SDA_PB_2024.pdf. 
118 C ourtney Albon, “Space Force wants to trim missile warning program, ” C4ISRNET, March 14, 2023, 
https://www.c4isrnet.com/battlefield-tech/space/2023/03/14/space-force-wants-to-trim-missile-warning-
satellite-program/. 
119 Sandr a Erwin, “The end of SBIRS: The Air Force says it’s time to move on, ” Space News, February 19, 
2018, https://spacenews.com/the-end-of-sbirs-air-force-says-its-time-to-move-on/. 
120 Def ense Support Program,  Defense Support Program (DSP): A Pictorial Chronology 1970-1998 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Space Based Infrared Systems (SBIRS) Program Office, 1998), https://nsarchive2.
gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB235/28.pdf; and Teague, “SBIRS Transformational Capability. ”
121 U .S. Department of the Air Force,  Fiscal Year (FY) 2022 Budget Estimates, Air Force: Space Procurement, 
Air Force (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, May 2021), https://www.saffm.hq.af.mil/Portals/84/
documents/FY22/PROCUREMENT_/FY22%20DAF%20J-Book%20-%203021%20-%20AF%20Space%20
Proc.pdf?ver=3nuG8BMFpd0qJu7aWPy82A%3D%3D; Office of the Secretary of Defense, Nuclear Matters 
Handbook 2020 [Revised] (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2020), https://www.acq.osd.mil/
ncbdp/nm/NMHB2020rev/docs/NMHB2020rev_Ch2.pdf; and William A. Chambers et al., Presidential 
Decision Time Regarding Nuclear Weapons Employment: An Assessment and Options, D-10655 (Alexandria, 
VA: Institute for Defense Analyses, 2019), https://www.globalzero.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/IDA-
Nuclear-Employment-Decision-Time-Assessment.pdf. 
122 C ourtney Albon, “Lockheed, Northrop choose payloads for Space Force missile warning satellites, ” 
Defense News, March 1, 2022, https://www.defensenews.com/battlefield-tech/space/2022/03/01/
lockheed-northrop-choose-payloads-for-space-force-missile-warning-satellites/; and Sandra Erwin, 
“Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman select payload providers for Space Force missile-warning 
satellites, ” Space News, March 1, 2022, https://spacenews.com/lockheed-martin-selects-raytheon-to-
supply-a-second-payload-for-missile-warning-satellites/. 
123 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Air Force 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force. 
124 Ibid.
125 Ibid.
126 Ibid.
127 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Budget Estimates, Air Force: Research, 
Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, April 2022), 
https://www.saffm.hq.af.mil/Portals/84/documents/FY23/RDTE_/FY23%20Space%20Force%20
Research%20Development%20Test%20and%20Evaluation.pdf. 
128 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Air Force 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force. 
129 Space Development Agency, Delivering Capabilities (Washington, DC: Space Development Agency, 
2022), https://www.sda.mil/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/SDA-About-Us-2020-to-2021_march-2022-1.
=== page 119 ===
Getting on Track  |  106
pdf; Derek Tournear, (presentation, 38th Space Symposium, Colorado Springs, CO, April 19, 2023); and 
Derek Tournear, “Space Development Agency Media Roundtable with SDA Director Dr. Derek Tournear, ” 
U.S. Department of Defense, July 19, 2022, https://www.defense.gov/News/Transcripts/Transcript/
Article/3098047/space-development-agency-director-dr-derek-tournear-holds-a-briefing-on-tranche/.
130 Space Development Agency, Tranche 1 Minimum Viable Product Request for Information Amendment 2, 
SDA-SN-21-0001 (Washington, DC: Space Development Agency, 2020), https://govtribe.com/opportunity/
federal-contract-opportunity/sda-tranche-1-minimum-viable-product-rfi-sdasn210001.
131 U .S. Department of Defense, “Space Development Agency Successfully Launches tranche 0 Satellites, ” 
press release, April 2, 2023, https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/3348974/space-
development-agency-successfully-launches-tranche-0-satellites/; and Theresa Hitchens, “Budget bump 
allows early start for SDA’s $2.5B missile tracking sats, ” Breaking Defense, March 15, 2022, https://
breakingdefense.com/2022/03/budget-bump-allows-early-start-for-sdas-2-5b-missile-tracking-sats/. 
132 Space Development Agency, “Space Development Agency: Delivering Capabilities. ” 
133 Space Development Agency, “Space Development Agency: Delivering Capabilities. ”
134 Space Development Agency, “Space Development Agency: Delivering Capabilities. ”
135 Space Development Agency, National Defense Space Architecture Tranche 1 Tracking Layer Program 
Solicitation Amendment 4, SDA-PS-22-02 (Washington, DC: Space Development Agency, 2022), https://
sam.gov/opp/81e81d57071c4dc69e7a58b72cdbb23e/view; Sandra Erwin, “Space Development Agency 
to acquire 28 missile-tracking satellites to launch in late 2024, ” Space News, December 8, 2021, https://
spacenews.com/space-development-agency-to-acquire-28-missile-tracking-satellites-to-launch-in-
late-2024/; and Derek Tournear, “Space Development Agency Director, Dr. Derek Tournear, Holds a 
Briefing on Tranche 1 Tracking Layer Contract Awards, ” U.S. Department of Defense, transcript, July 
19, 2022, https://www.defense.gov/News/Transcripts/Transcript/Article/3098047/space-development-
agency-director-dr-derek-tournear-holds-a-briefing-on-tranche/.
136 Amanda Miller, “How the SDA’s Satellite Swarm Will Track Hypersonic Missiles Where Others Can’t, ” Air 
and Space Forces Magazine, January 12, 2022, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/how-the-sdas-satellite-
swarm-will-track-hypersonic-missiles-where-others-cant/; and “Space Development Agency delivering 
‘good enough’ space-based capabilities to warfighters fast, ” YouTube video, posted by Government 
Matters, January 2, 2022, 6:47, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xt9BtnyFKYU. 
137 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Air Force 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force; and Theresa Hitchens, “Congressional Concern 
Re-Emerges on Fate of MDA’s Hypersonic Missile Tracking Sensors, ” Breaking Defense, May 11, 2023, 
https://breakingdefense.sites.breakingmedia.com/2023/05/congressional-concern-re-emerges-on-fate-
of-mdas-hypersonic-missile-tracking-sensors/. 
138 Space Development Agency, Proliferated Defense Space Architecture Tranche 2 Tracking Layer Program 
Solicitation, SDA-PS-23-05 (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense, September 5, 2023). 
139 Space Development Agency, Proliferated Defense Space Architecture Tranche 2 Tracking Layer DRAFT 
Program Solicitation. 
140 Sandr a Erwin, “L3Harris, Northrop Grumman to build 28 missile-tracking satellites for U.S. Space 
Development Agency, ” Space News, July 18, 2022, https://spacenews.com/l3harris-northrop-grumman-
to-build-28-missile-tracking-satellites-for-u-s-space-development-agency/; and Karoun Mirjian, “U.S. 
touts progress in hypersonic arms race with China, Russia, ” Washington Post, July 19, 2022, https://www.
washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/07/19/hypersonic-missile-pentagon-china-russia/. 
141 U .S. Department of the Air Force,  Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Budget Estimates, Air Force: Research, 
=== page 120 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  107
Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force.
142 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Air Force 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force. 
143 I bid.; and U.S. Department of the Air Force, Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Budget Estimates, Air Force: Research, 
Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force.
144 Gar y Goff, “Space & Ground Based Hypersonic Tracking and Sensor Technologies Needs and 
Requirements” (presentation, 2nd National Hypersonic Weapons Conference, April 25, 2023).
145 Ibid. 
146 Ther esa Hitchens, “SMC Eyes MEO Sats for Missile Tracking, ” Breaking Defense, July 1, 2021, https://
breakingdefense.com/2021/07/smc-eyes-meo-sats-for-missile-tracking/. 
147 Space Systems Command, “The first Medium Earth Orbit Missile Warning/Missile Tracking Program 
successfully completes its critical design review and goes into production, ” media release, Space Systems 
Command, November 27, 2023, https://www.ssc.spaceforce.mil/Portals/3/Documents/PRESS%20
RELEASES/The%20first%20Medium%20Earth%20Orbit%20Resilient%20Missile%20Warning%20
Missile%20Tracking%20Program%20successfully%20completes%20its%20critical%20design%20
review%20and%20goes%20into%20production.pdf?ver=reUXW4LrHRdCASR2m4pE7w%3D%3D; and 
“Millennium Space Systems Missile Track Custody PDR complete in just four months, ” Millennium Space 
Systems, July 12, 2023, https://www.millennium-space.com/media/millennium-space-systems-missile-
track-custody-pdr-complete-in-just-four-months. 
148 Ibid.
149 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Air Force 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force. 
150 “2 021 McAleese Defense Programs Conference Speaker: Vice Admiral John A. Hill, ” YouTube 
Video, posted by McAleese and Associates, May 19, 2021, 48:38, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=5L9yufZe57Y; and Theresa Hitchens, “Optical Links Key To SDA, MDA Missile Tracking, ” 
Breaking Defense, January 29, 2021, https://breakingdefense.com/2021/01/optical-links-key-to-sda-mda-
missile-tracking-network/. 
151 Depar tment of Defense,  Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Missile Defense 
Agency Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide.  
152 I bid.; Sandra Erwin, “L3Harris’ missile-tracking satellites pass critical design reviews, ” Space News, 
December 20, 2021, https://spacenews.com/l3harris-missile-tracking-satellites-pass-critical-design-
reviews/; Sandra Erwin, “Northrop Grumman selects Airbus to supply satellite buses for U.S. military 
constellation, ” Space News, July 5, 2022, https://spacenews.com/northrop-grumman-selects-airbus-
to-supply-satellite-buses-for-u-s-military-constellation/; Theresa Hitchens, “After Space Tests, DoD 
to Decide on Hypersonic Tracking Sats by Late ’23, ” Breaking Defense, March 29, 2022, https://
breakingdefense.com/2022/03/after-space-tests-dod-to-decide-on-hypersonic-tracking-sats-in-late-23/; 
and Theresa Hitchens, “MDA: Hypersonic missile tracking prototypes on point for 2023 launch, ” 
Breaking Defense, November 11, 2021, https://breakingdefense.com/2021/11/mda-hypersonic-missile-
tracking-prototypes-on-point-for-2023-launch/. 
153 W illiam M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Pub. L. No. 
116–283, § 1645 (2021), https://www.congress.gov/116/bills/hr6395/BILLS-116hr6395enr.pdf. 
154 Depar tment of Defense, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Missile Defense 
Agency Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide.  
=== page 121 ===
Getting on Track  |  108
155 J on Hill and Tom Karako, “MDA and the 2023 Budget” (presentation, CSIS, Washington, DC, May 23, 
2022), https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/220523_MDA_2023_Budget.
pdf?Zi1DSNBbXoGoam2P32ES5yiuyI2IWjJQ. 
156 Ther esa Hitchens, “Congressional Concern Re-Emerges on Fate of MDA’s Hypersonic Missile Tracking 
Sensors, ” Breaking Defense, May 11, 2023, https://breakingdefense.sites.breakingmedia.com/2023/05/
congressional-concern-re-emerges-on-fate-of-mdas-hypersonic-missile-tracking-sensors/ .
157 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Air Force 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force. 
158 Space Development Agency, Proliferated Defense Space Architecture Tranche 2 Tracking Layer DRAFT 
Program Solicitation.
159 Space Development Agency, SDA F2 Draft Solicitation, SDA-SN-23-0013 (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Defense, July 7, 2023), https://sam.gov/opp/07bad2f2e51c48fa9f0ac2c847b9ddf6/view. 
160 Sam Wilson,  Fiscal Year 2023 Space Force Budget Analysis: Missile Warning and Tracking Looms Large 
(El Segundo, CA: Aerospace Corporation, September 2022), https://csps.aerospace.org/sites/default/
files/2022-09/Wilson_FY23BudgetBrief_20220919.pdf. 
161 Sandr a Erwin, “On National Security | Tough to-do list for new Space Force boss, ” Space News, October 
11, 2022, https://spacenews.com/on-national-security-tough-to-do-list-for-new-space-force-boss/. 
162 Miller , Jr., “United States Space Command’s Role as the Global Sensor Manager, ” 8. 
163 U .S. Department of Defense, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Missile 
Defense Agency Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide; Government Accountability 
Office, Missile Defense: Better Oversight and Coordination Needed for Counter-Hypersonic Development, 
GAO-22-105075 (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, June 2022), https://www.gao.gov/products/
gao-22-105075; and Wes Rumbaugh, “Bad Idea: Ignoring Congressional Oversight on Space Sensor 
Development, ” Defense360, CSIS, December 4, 2020, https://defense360.csis.org/bad-idea-ignoring-
congressional-oversight-on-space-sensor-development/.
164 Space Development Agency, Proliferated Defense Space Architecture Tranche 2 Tracking Layer DRAFT 
Program Solicitation, SDA-PS-23-05. 
165 Michael Martina and David Brunnstrom, “CIA chief warns against underestimating Xi’s ambitions toward 
Taiwan, ” Reuters, February 2, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/world/cia-chief-says-chinas-xi-little-
sobered-by-ukraine-war-2023-02-02/; and Sweta Sharma, “Xi undecided on whether to order military 
unification with Taiwan by 2027, top US official claims, ” The Independent, July 1, 2023, https://www.
independent.co.uk/asia/china/china-taiwan-unification-xi-jinping-mark-milley-b2367710.html. 
166 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 Budget Estimates: Air Force 
Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force; and Jon Hill and Thomas Karako, “MDA and the 
2023 Budget” (presentation, CSIS, May 25, 2022), https://www.csis.org/analysis/mda-and-2023-budget.
167 U .S. Department of Defense,  National Defense Science and Technology Strategy 2023 (Washington, DC: 
Department of Defense, 2023), https://media.defense.gov/2023/May/09/2003218877/-1/-1/0/NDSTS-
FINAL-WEB-VERSION.PDF. 
168 W ayne E. Meyer, via Tom Druggan, “The Aegis Approach with Rear Admiral Tom Druggan” (presentation, 
CSIS, Washington, DC, November 18, 2021), https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/
publication/211118_Druggan_Aegis_Approach.pdf?VersionId=xsREA4fWP6GR5C8t5pSxVsRlj4Mh2vtN. 
169 Fr ank Turner (presentation, Space and Missile Defense Symposium 2021, Huntsville, AL, August 11, 
2021). 
=== page 122 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  109
170 W illiam J. Broad, “Physics Body Concedes Mistakes in Study of Missile Defense, ” New York Times, 
September 19, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/19/science/missile-defense-north-korea.
html; Richard Garwin and Theodore Postol, “Airborne Patrol to Destroy DPRK ICBMs in Powered 
Flight” (presentation, Washington, DC, 2017), https://rlg.fas.org/airborne.pdf; Jaganath Sankaran and 
Steve Fetter, “Defending the United States: Revisiting National Missile Defense against North Korea, ” 
International Security 46, no. 3 (February 25, 2022): 51–86, doi:10.1162/isec_a_00426; and Dean A. 
Wilkening, “Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense, ” Science & Global Security 12, no. 1–2 ( January 
2004): 1–67, doi:10.1080/08929880490464649.
171  Daniel Cebul, “Pentagon preparing to test MQ-9 Reaper for Missile Defense Missions, ” Defense News, 
August 27, 2018, https://www.defensenews.com/air/2018/08/27/pentagon-preparing-to-test-mq-9-reaper-
for-missile-defense-missions/; and Courtney E. Howard, “GA-ASI Predator B Detects and Tracks Ballistic 
Missile during Airborne Missile Defense Test, ” Military & Aerospace Electronics, August 16, 2016, https://
www.militaryaerospace.com/commercial-aerospace/article/14229008/gaasi-predator-b-detects-and-
tracks-ballistic-missile-during-airborne-missile-defense-test. 
172 “N avy Conducts First Live Fire NIFC-CA Test with F-35, ” Naval Sea Systems Command, September 13, 
2016, https://www.navsea.navy.mil/Media/News/Article-View/Article/942188/navy-conducts-first-live-fire-
nifc-ca-test-with-f-35/; and Steve Trimble, “F-35 Teams Up With PAC-3 For Cruise Missile Kill, ” Aviation 
Week, July 15, 2021, https://aviationweek.com/defense-space/missile-defense-weapons/f-35-teams-pac-3-
cruise-missile-kill. 
173 C ourtney Albon, “‘SkyRange’ uncrewed aircraft to speed hypersonic testing by 2024, ” C4ISRNET, 
September 16, 2022, https://www.c4isrnet.com/unmanned/2022/09/16/skyrange-uncrewed-aircraft-to-
speed-hypersonic-testing-by-2024/. 
174 L awrence A. Stutzreim, Reimagining the MQ-9 Reaper (Arlington, VA: Mitchell Institute, 2021), https://
mitchellaerospacepower.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/Reimagining_the_MQ-9_Reaper_Policy_
Paper_30-1.pdf. 
175 M asao Dahlgren, “In IBCS Test, Patriot, F-35 Intercept Cruise Missile Target, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, July 15, 
2021, https://missilethreat.csis.org/in-ibcs-test-patriot-f-35s-intercept-cruise-missile-target/. 
176 Pa ul Bracken, The Hunt for Mobile Missiles: Nuclear Weapons, AI, and the New Arms Race (Philadelphia, 
PA: Foreign Policy Research Institute, 2020), https://www.fpri.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/the-
hunt-for-mobile-missiles.pdf; Austin Long and Brendan Rittenhouse Green, “Stalking the Secure Second 
Strike: Intelligence, Counterforce, and Nuclear Strategy, ” Journal of Strategic Studies 38, no. 1–2 ( January 
2, 2015): 38–73, doi:10.1080/01402390.2014.958150; and Paul McLeary, “DoD Wants Help To Spot - & Kill 
- Mobile Missiles, ” Breaking Defense, February 22, 2019, https://breakingdefense.sites.breakingmedia.
com/2019/02/dod-wants-help-to-spot-kill-mobile-missiles/.  
177 “B est Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, ” National Renewable Energy Laboratory, n.d., https://
www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html; HAPSMobile Inc., “HAPSMobile’s Sunglider Succeeds in 
Stratospheric Test Flight, ” press release, October 8, 2020, https://www.hapsmobile.com/en/news/
press/2020/20201008_01/; Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Thinking About the 
U.S. Military’s Next-Generation UAS Force: Final Report (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and 
Budgetary Assessments, September 2013), https://www.esd.whs.mil/Portals/54/Documents/FOID/
Reading%20Room/Litigation_Release/Litigation%20Release%20-%20Thinking%20About%20the%20
U.S.%20Military’s%20Next%20Generation%20UAS%20Force%20Final%20Report%20%20201309.
pdf; Dorian F. Colas, “HALE Multidisciplinary Design Optimization Part I: Solar-Powered Single 
and Multiple-Boom Aircraft, ” AIAA Aviation Technology Integration and Operations Conference, 
Atlanta, GA, June 25–29, 2018, https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/abs/10.2514/6.2018-3028; Darrell Etherington, 
“Facebook’s Aquila drone completes its second test flight, lands well this time, ” Techcrunch, June 
29, 2017, https://techcrunch.com/2017/06/29/facebooks-aquila-drone-completes-it-second-testflight-
=== page 123 ===
Getting on Track  |  110
lands-well-this-time/; Andrew Eversden, “After Setting Ultra-Endurance Record, Army Zephyr Drone 
Keeps Flying, Whether It Wants to or Not, ” Breaking Defense, July 22, 2022, https://breakingdefense.
sites.breakingmedia.com/2022/07/after-setting-ultra-endurance-record-army-zephyr-drone-keeps-
flying-whether-it-wants-to-or-not/; Lee Ferran, “Army’s Ultra-Endurance Zephyr Drone Comes down 
after ‘unexpected Termination’ over Arizona Desert, ” Breaking Defense, August 23, 2022, https://
breakingdefense.sites.breakingmedia.com/2022/08/armys-ultra-endurance-zephyr-drone-comes-
down-after-unexpected-termination-over-arizona-desert/; Demetrios Kellari et al., “The influence of 
technology trends on future aircraft architecture, ” AIAA Journal of Aircraft 54, no. 6 (2017): 2213–27, 
https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/115163; David Kramer, “Hydrogen-powered aircraft may be getting 
a lift, ” Physics Today 73, no. 12 (2020), 27, https://doi.org/10.1063/PT.3.4632; Bailey Light, “NASA Small 
Business Partnership Prepares Drone for 30-Day Science Flights, ” NASA, August 5, 2020, https://
www.nasa.gov/feature/ames/nasa-small-business-partnership-prepares-drone-for-30-day-science-
flights/; Flavio Oliveira et al., “High-Altitude Platforms — Present Situation and Technology Trends, ” 
Journal of Aerospace Technology Management 8, no. 3 (2016): 259–62, https://www.scielo.br/j/jatm/a/
JQv95PgKcDCtrn95vLLV8qN/?lang=en; Pat O’Neil, “Boeing High Altitude Long Endurance (HALE) UAS, ” 
Boeing, April 2012, https://higherlogicdownload.s3.amazonaws.com/AUVSI/656942e4-4448-41c3-877d-
0c5f3ea40e63/UploadedImages/KnowledgeVault/HALE.pdf; and S. Tsach, “Development Trends for 
next generation UAV systems” AIAA Infotech@Aerospace 2007 Conference and Exhibit, Rohnert Park, 
CA, May 7–10, 2007. 
178 “St rait of Hormuz: US confirms drone shot down by Iran, ” BBC News, June 20, 2019, https://www.bbc.
com/news/world-middle-east-48700965.  
179 Chr istina T. Chaplain, “Space Acquisitions: DOD Continues to Face Challenges of Delayed Delivery of 
Critical Space Capabilities and Fragmented Leadership, ” statement before the Senate Armed Services 
Committee, 115th Cong., 1st sess., May 17, 2017, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-17-619t.pdf; and Jon 
Ludwigson et al., Missile Warning Satellites: Comprehensive Cost and Schedule Information Would Enhance 
Congressional Oversight, GAO-21-105249 (Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office, 2021), 
https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-21-105249.pdf; and Jon Ludwigson et al., DOD Space Acquisitions: 
Including Users Early and Often in Software Development Could Benefit Programs, GAO-19-136 (Washington, 
DC: Government Accountability Office, 2019), https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-19-136.pdf.  
180 Dickinson, “Strategic Landpower Dialogue: A Conversation with General James Dickinson. ”  
181 Blickst ein et al., Acquisition of Space Systems. 
182 Ther esa Hitchens, “SMC, SDA Missile Warning Sat Ground Systems Won’t ‘Talk’ – For Now, ” Breaking 
Defense, January 6, 2021, https://breakingdefense.com/2021/01/smc-sda-missile-warning-sat-ground-
systems-wont-talk/. 
183 Thomas L. Frey et al., “F-35 Information Fusion, ” in 2018 Aviation Technology, Integration, and 
Operations Conference, AIAA AVIATION Forum (Reston, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics, 2018), doi:10.2514/6.2018-3520; J.K. Hackett and M. Shah, “Multi-Sensor Fusion: 
A Perspective, ” in Proceedings., IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Cincinnati, OH: IEEE Computer Society Press, 
1990), 1324–30, doi:10.1109/ROBOT.1990.126184; Keli Huang et al., “Multi-Modal Sensor Fusion for Auto 
Driving Perception: A Survey, ” arXiv, 2022, doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2202.02703; and De Jong Yeong et al., 
“Sensor and Sensor Fusion Technology in Autonomous Vehicles: A Review, ” Sensors 21, no. 6 (March 18, 
2021), 2140, doi:10.3390/s21062140. 
184 Hit chens, “SMC, SDA Missile Warning Sat Ground Systems Won’t ‘Talk’—For Now. ”  
185 Office of Inspector General, Evaluation of the United States Air Force Enterprise Ground Services, 
DODIG-2020-074 (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, March 2020), https://www.dodig.mil/
=== page 124 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  111
reports.html/Article/2127907/evaluation-of-the-united-states-air-force-enterprise-ground-services-
dodig-2020/. 
186 U .S. Department of the Air Force, Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Budget Estimates, Air Force: Research, 
Development, Test & Evaluation, Space Force. 
187 U .S. Department of Defense, Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 Budget Estimates, Space Development Agency: Research, 
Development, Test & Evaluation, Defense-Wide (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2022), https://
comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2023/budget_justification/pdfs/03_RDT_
and_E/SDA_PB2023.pdf. 
188 See Chapter 3, “Finding the Right Mix. ”
189 Office of the Deputy Undersecretary of Defense for Space, Point Paper on the SMTS Program 
(Washington, DC: Department of Defense, October 11, 1996). 
190 J ohn Plumb and Tom Karako, “The 2022 Missile Defense Review: A Conversation with 
John Plumb, ” transcript, CSIS, Washington, DC, November 4, 2022, https://csis-website-
prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/ts221114_Plumb_Defense_Review.
pdf?VersionId=89k9vSXfGndB5Vt43UZa3dhAd1DhnVR7. 
191 B . Chance Saltzman, “Vision and Priorities for the United States Space Force, ” Testimony before the 
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces on the Senate Armed Services Committee, 118th Cong., 1st sess., 
March 14, 2023, https://www.c-span.org/video/?526683-1/senate-hearing-us-space-force-priorities; and 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic 
and Security Review Commission. 
192 Def ense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space (Washington, DC: Defense Intelligence 
Agency, 2022), https://www.dia.mil/Portals/110/Documents/News/Military_Power_Publications/
Challenges_Security_Space_2022.pdf; and Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Makena Young, Defense 
Against the Dark Arts in Space (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2021), 11–18, https://www.csis.org/
analysis/defense-against-dark-arts-space-protecting-space-systems-counterspace-weapons.  
193 Br ian G. Chow, “Stalkers in Space:  Defeating the Threat, ” Strategic Studies Quarterly 11, no. 2 (Summer 
2017): 82–116, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26271574; Greg Hadley, “SDA’s Tournear ‘Just Not’ Afraid 
of Satellite Shootdowns. Supply Chain is the Greater Worry, ” Air and Space Forces Magazine, April 5, 
2023, https://www.airandspaceforces.com/sda-tournear-kinetic-attacks-satellites/; and Ankit Panda, 
“Revealed: The Details of China’s Latest Hit-to-Kill Interceptor Test, ” The Diplomat, February 21, 2018, 
https://thediplomat.com/2018/02/revealed-the-details-of-chinas-latest-hit-to-kill-interceptor-test/. 
194 Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security, Space Domain 
Mission Assurance: A Resilience Taxonomy (Washington DC: Department of Defense, 2015), https://man.
fas.org/eprint/resilience.pdf. 
195 Char les S. Galbreath, “Building U.S. Space Force Counterspace Capabilities: An Imperative for America’s 
Defense, ” Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies, June 2023, https://mitchellaerospacepower.org/wp-
content/uploads/2023/06/Building-US-Space-Force-Counterspace-Capabilities-FINAL-1.pdf.  
196 Ibid.
197 NASA, Mitigating In-Space Charging Effects—A Guideline, NASA-HDBK-4002A (Washington, DC: NASA, 
2017), https://ccmc.gsfc.nasa.gov/RoR_WWW/SWREDI/2018/nasa-hdbk-4002a_revalidated.pdf; and 
Harrison, Johnson, and Young, Defense Against the Dark Arts in Space, 11–18. 
198 H arrison, Johnson, and Young, Defense Against the Dark Arts in Space. 
199 Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security,  Space Domain 
=== page 125 ===
Getting on Track  |  112
Mission Assurance: A Resilience Taxonomy. 
200 Oli vier Weck et al., Commercial Space Technology Roadmap (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 2018), https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/commercial_space_technology_
roadmap.pdf; and Sasha Weston et al., Small Spacecraft Technology State of the Art Report (Mountain 
View, CA: NASA, 2021), https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20210021263. 
201 V eronica Foreman, Afreen Siddiqi, and Olivier Weck, “Advantages and Limitations of Small Satellites 
in Low Earth Orbit Constellations: A Prospective Review, ” AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, 
Logan, UT, August 2018, https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/smallsat/2018/all2018/358. 
202 I bid.; Boshuizen et al., “Results from the Planet Labs Flock Constellation”; and Harris and Siegert, 
“Missile-Warning Augmentation. ”
203 Michael Griffin and Tom Karako, “Reenergizing the Missile Defense Enterprise, ” transcript, CSIS, 
Washington, DC, November 13, 2018, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/
event/181211_Transcript.pdf. 
204 C . Todd Lopez, “Agency Director Discusses Multi-Pronged Approach to Resiliency in Space, ” 
U.S. Department of Defense, April 4, 2023, https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/
Article/3351552/agency-director-discusses-multi-pronged-approach-to-resiliency-in-space/. 
205 Plumb , “Missile Defense Strategy, Policies, and Programs. ”
206 “2 0230418 STR Hearing: FY24 Budget Request for Missile Defense and Missile Defeat Programs, ” 
YouTube video; and David Vergun, “Official Discusses Steps to Deter, Defeat Missile Threats, ” 
U.S. Department of Defense, April 19, 2023, https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/
Article/3367914/official-discusses-steps-to-deter-defeat-missile-threats/. 
207 J im Garamone, “Space Integral to the DOD Way of War, Policy Chief Says, ” U.S. Department of Defense, 
July 20, 2023, https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3465982/space-integral-to-
the-dod-way-of-war-policy-chief-says/.
208 W illiam J. Broad, “The Secret War Over Pentagon Aid in Fighting Wildfires, ” New York Times, September 
27, 2021, updated August 23, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/27/science/wildfires-military-
satellites.html; Sandra Erwin, “An open system for missile warning satellite data is in the works but 
faces challenges, ” Space News, February 1, 2021, https://spacenews.com/an-open-system-for-missile-
warning-satellite-data-is-in-the-works-but-faces-challenges/; Ann Kim, The GPS Playbook: How a Space-
Based Technology Generated the Largest Venture Outcomes in History (New York: Space Capital LP, 2020), 
https://www.svb.com/contentassets/c0e37e68e9894f5a9719b0dacadb1aaf/the-gps-playbook-2020.pdf; 
and Nathan Strout, “L3Harris leaped from tracking weather to tracking missiles, cracking a competitive 
field, ” C4ISRNet, February 17, 2021, https://www.c4isrnet.com/battlefield-tech/space/2021/02/17/l3harris-
leaped-from-tracking-weather-to-tracking-missiles-cracking-a-competitive-field/.
209 Qinglin Niu et al., “Infr ared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle under Time-Varying Angles 
of Attack, ” Chinese Journal of Aeronautics 32, no. 4 (April 2019): 861–74, doi:10.1016/j.cja.2019.01.003.
210 Gunnar Farnebäck, “Two-Frame Motion Estimation Based on Polynomial Expansion, ” in Image Analysis, 
eds. J. Bigun and T. Gustavsson, SCI 2003, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2749 (2003), doi:10.1007/3-
540-45103-X_50. 
211 Space Development Agency, SDA Tranche 0 Tracking Layer Draft RFP: Attachment 3 - Tracking Layer 
T0 WFOV Technical Requirements Document (Washington, DC: Space Development Agency, May 2020), 
https://govtribe.com/file/government-file/attach-3-tracking-layer-t0-wfov-trd-draft-dot-xlsx.
212 A . H. Ballard, “Rosette Constellation of Earth Satellites, ” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic 
=== page 126 ===
Masao Dahlgren and Tom Karako  |  113
Systems AES-16, no. 5 (1980), https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4102386; L. Rider, “Optimized 
Polar Orbit Constellations for Redundant Earth Coverage, ” Journal of the Astronautical Sciences 33 
(1985), https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1985JAnSc..33..147R/abstract; and J. G. Walker, “Satellite 
Constellations, ” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 37 (1984), https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/
abs/1984JBIS...37..559W/abstract.  
213 Thi s study does not vary the relative spacing between satellites in adjacent planes from the default 
parameter prescribed in STK’s Walker satellite constellation tool. 
214 Thomas G. Roberts, “Spaceports of the World, ” Aerospace Security, CSIS, March 13, 2019, https://
aerospace.csis.org/spaceports-of-the-world/.
215 Thi s estimate is conservative. The Tranche 0 constellation has a required solar exclusion parameter of 
under 20 degrees. 
216 K aan Çelikbilek et al., “Survey on Optimization Methods for LEO-Satellite-Based Networks with 
Applications in Future Autonomous Transportation, ” Sensors 22 (2022), 1421,https://doi.org/10.3390/
s22041421;  Deb et al., “A Fast and Elitist Multiobjective Genetic Algorithm: NSGA-II, ” IEEE Transactions 
on Evolutionary Computation 6, no. 2 (April 2002): 182–97, doi:10.1109/4235.996017; Robert Scott 
Legge Jr., “Optimization and Valuation of Reconfigurable Satellite Constellations Under Uncertainty, ” 
(PhD diss., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2014); and XueyingWang et al., “Satellite 
constellation design with genetic algorithms based on system performance, ” Journal of Systems 
Engineering and Electronics 27, no. 2 (April 2016): 379–85, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.
jsp?arnumber=7514426.
=== page 127 ===
COVER PHOTO CSIS MISSILE DEFENSE PROJECT
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 | www.csis.org
