=== page 1 ===
DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.02
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/index.html[3/3/2011 3:33:35 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
The DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.02
Welcome to DoDAF Version 2.02! This is the official and current version for the Department
of Defense Architecture Framework.
Version 2.02
This is the current release of DoDAF as of August
2010.
A PDF version of this website is produced
periodically and can be downloaded here: DoDAF
2.02.pdf
For a description of changes made to DoDAF/DM2
2.01 to create DoDAF/DM2 2.02, download the Version Description Document here.
DoDAF Conformance
DoD Components are expected to conform to DoDAF to the maximum extent possible
in development of architectures within the Department. Conformance ensures that
reuse of information, architecture artifacts, models, and viewpoints can be shared with
common understanding. Conformance is expected in both the classified and
unclassified communities, and further guidance will be forthcoming on specific
processes and procedures for the classified architecture development efforts in the
Department.
DoDAF conformance is achieved when:
The data in a described architecture is defined according to the DM2 concepts,
associations, and attributes.
The architectural data is capable of transfer in accordance with the PES.
DoDAF Journal
The DoDAF Journal is a community of interest based discussion board. The Journal includes
descriptions of best practices, lessons learned, example views and DM2 datasets, DoDAF
model templates, DoDAF meeting presentations, and tutorial materials, and reference
documents. It can be used by reference, component, capability, segment, and solution
architects and core process stakeholders. Any member of the DoDAF community may submit
material for publication and an editorial board will work with the authors to determine
appropriateness, ensure public releasability, and make any needed changes to content.
 
Contact Information
For
 any general enquiries, please contact us via the general enquiry mailboxes listed on our
contact page.
 
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
1
=== page 2 ===
DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.02
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/index.html[3/3/2011 3:33:35 PM]
Go to top of page ↑
 
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
2
=== page 3 ===
DoDAF Introduction
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/background.html[3/3/2011 3:33:50 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Introduction
The Department of Defense Architecture Framework (DoDAF), Version 2.0 is the
overarching, comprehensive framework and conceptual model enabling the development of
architectures to facilitate the ability of Department of Defense (DoD) managers at all levels
to make key decisions more effectively through organized information sharing across the
Department, Joint Capability Areas (JCAs), Mission, Component, and Program boundaries.
The DoDAF serves as one of the principal pillars supporting the DoD Chief Information
Officer (CIO) in his responsibilities for development and maintenance of architectures
required under the Clinger-Cohen Act. DoDAF is prescribed for the use and development of
Architectural Descriptions in the Department. It also provides extensive guidance on the
development of architectures supporting the adoption and execution of Net-centric services
within the Department.
DoD managers, as process owners, specify the requirements and control the development of
architectures within their areas of authority and responsibility. They select an architect and
an architecture development team to create the architecture in accordance with the
requirements they define.
DoD Components are expected to conform to the DoDAF developing architectures within the
Department. DoDAF Conformance ensures reuse of information and that architecture
artifacts, models, and viewpoints can be shared with common understanding.
DoDAF V2.0 focuses on architectural "data", rather than on developing individual "products"
as described in previous versions. In general, data can be collected, organized, and stored
by a wide range of architecture tools developed by commercial sources. It is anticipated that
these tools will adopt the DM2 PES for the exchange of architectural data.
DoDAF V2.0 provides a Data Capture Method for each data group of the DM2 to guide
architects in collecting and organizing the necessary architectural data.
The DoDAF enables architectural content that is "Fit-for-Purpose" as an architectural
description consistent with specific project or mission objectives. Because the techniques of
architectural description can be applied at myriad levels of an enterprise, the purpose or use
of an architectural description at each level will be different in content, structure, and level of
detail. Tailoring the architectural description development to address specific, well-
articulated, and understood purposes, will help ensure the necessary data is collected at the
appropriate level of detail to support specific decisions or objectives.
Visualizing architectural data is accomplished through models (e.g., the products described
in previous versions of DoDAF). Models can be documents, spreadsheets, dashboards, or
other graphical representations and serve as a template for organizing and displaying data in
a more easily understood format. When data is collected and presented as a "filled-in"
model, the result is called a view . Organized collections of views (often representing
processes, systems, services, standards, etc.) are referred to as viewpoints, and with
appropriate definitions are collectively called the Architectural Description.
DoDAF V2.0 discusses DoDAF-described Models and Fit-for-Purpose Views:
DoDAF-described Models (also referred to as Models)  are created from the
subset of data for a particular purpose. Once the DoDAF-described Models are
populated with data, these "views" are useful as examples for presentation purposes,
and can be used as described, modified, or tailored as needed.
Background
Six Core Processes DoDAF
Supports
DM2 Support for the Six Core
Processes DoDAF Supports
What is New in DoDAF V2.0
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
3
=== page 4 ===
DoDAF Introduction
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/background.html[3/3/2011 3:33:50 PM]
Fit-for-Purpose Views  are user-defined views of a subset of architectural data
created for some specific purpose (i.e., "Fit-for-Purpose"). While these views are not
described or defined in DoDAF, they can be created, as needed, to ensure that
presentation of architectural data is easily understood. This enables organizations to
use their own established presentation preferences in their deliberations.
The models described in DoDAF, including those that are legacies from previous versions of
the Framework, are provided as pre-defined examples that can be used when developing
presentations of architectural data.
Specific DoDAF-described Models for a particular purpose are prescribed by process-owners.
All the DoDAF-described Models do not have to be created. If an activity model is created, a
necessary set of data for the activity model is required. Key process owners will decide what
architectural data is required, generally through DoDAF-described Models or Fit-for-Purpose
Views. However, other regulations and instructions from the DoD and the Chairman, Joint
Chiefs of Staff (CJCS) have particular presentation view requirements.
The architect and stakeholders select views to ensure that the Architectural Descriptions will
support current and future states of the process or activity under review. Selecting
Architecture Viewpoints carefully ensures that the views adequately frame concerns, e.g., by
explaining the requirements and proposed solutions, in ways that enhance audience
understanding.
DoDAF also serves as the principal guide for development of integrated architectures as
defined in DoD Instruction 4630.8, which defines an integrated architecture as "An
architecture consisting of multiples views or perspectives facilitating integration and
promoting interoperability across capabilities and among integrated architectures". The term
integrated means that data required in more than one instance in architectural views is
commonly understood across those views.
The DM2 provides information needed to collect, organize, and store data in a way easily
understood.
The DM2 replaces the Core Architecture Data Model (CADM) which supported previous
versions of the DoDAF. DM2 is a data construct that facilitates reader understanding of the
use of data within an architecture document. CADM can continue to be used in support of
architectures created in previous versions of DoDAF. NOTE: DoDAF V2.0 does NOT
prescribe a Physical Data Model (PDM), leaving that task to software developers
who will implement the principles and practices of DoDAF in their own software
offerings.
DoDAF V2.0 is a marked change from earlier versions of Command, Control,
Communications, Computers, and Intelligence Surveillance Reconnaissance Architecture
Framework (C4ISR AF) or DoDAF, in that architects now have the freedom to create
enterprise architectures to meet the demands of their customers. The core of DoDAF V2.0 is
a data-centric approach where the creation of architectures to support decision-making is
secondary to the collection, storage, and maintenance of data needed to make efficient and
effective decisions. The architect and stakeholders select views to ensure that architectures
will explain current and future states of the process or activity under review. Selecting
architectural views carefully ensures that they adequately explain the requirement and
proposed solution in ways that will enhance audience understanding.
DoDAF V2.0 also provides, but does not require, a particular methodology in architecture
development. It provides guidance and suggestions on how to ensure that other proposed
methods can be adapted as needed to meet the DoD requirements for data collection and
storage. Similarly, the views presented in DoDAF are examples, intended to serve as a
possible visualization of a particular view. DoDAF V2.0 also continues providing support for
views (i.e., 'products' developed in previous versions of the Framework). These views do not
require any particular graphical design by toolset vendors.
Authority: Law and Policy DoDAF Supports
Federal law and policies have expressed the need for architectures in support of business
4
=== page 5 ===
DoDAF Introduction
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/background.html[3/3/2011 3:33:50 PM]
decisions.
Policy/Guidance Description
Clinger-Cohen Act
of 1996
Recognizes the need for Federal Agencies to improve the way they
select and manage IT resources and states, “information technology
architecture, with respect to an executive agency, means an integrated
framework for evolving or maintaining IT and acquiring new IT to
achieve the agency’s strategic goals and information resources
management goals.” Chief Information Officers are assigned the
responsibility for “developing, maintaining, and facilitating the
implementation of a sound and integrated IT architecture for the
executive agency”.
E-Government
Act of 2002
Calls for the development of Enterprise Architecture to aid in enhancing
the management and promotion of electronic government services and
processes.
Office of
Management and
Budget Circular
A-130
“Establishes policy for the management of Federal information
resources” and calls for the use of Enterprise Architectures to support
capital planning and investment control processes. Includes
implementation principles and guidelines for creating and maintaining
Enterprise Architectures.
OMB Federal
Enterprise
Architecture
Reference Models
(FEA RM)
Facilitates cross-agency analysis and the identification of duplicative
investments, gaps, and opportunities for collaboration within and across
Federal Agencies. Alignment with the reference models ensures that
important elements of the FEA are described in a common and
consistent way. The DoD Enterprise Architecture Reference Models are
aligned with the FEA RM.
OMB Enterprise
Architecture
Assessment
Framework
(EAAF)
Serves as the basis for enterprise architecture maturity assessments.
Compliance with the EAAF ensures that enterprise architectures are
advanced and appropriately developed to improve the performance of
information resource management and IT investment decision making.
General
Accounting Office
Enterprise
Architecture
Management
Maturity
Framework
(EAMMF)
“Outlines the steps toward achieving a stable and mature process for
managing the development, maintenance, and implementation of
enterprise architecture.” Using the EAMMF allows managers to
determine what steps are needed for improving architecture
management.
 
Go to top of page ↑
Six Core Processes DoDAF Supports
Organizations within the DoD may define local change management processes, supportable
by Architectural Descriptions, while adhering to defined decision support processes mandated
by the Department, including JCIDS, the DAS, SE, PPBE, Net-centric Integration, and PfM.
These key support processes are designed to provide uniform, mandated, processes in
critical decision-making areas, supplemented by individual agency operations, defined by
Architectural Descriptions tailored to support those decisions-making requirements.
Joint Capability Integration and Development System
5
=== page 6 ===
DoDAF Introduction
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/background.html[3/3/2011 3:33:50 PM]
The primary objective of the JCIDS process is to ensure warfighters receive the capabilities
required to execute their assigned missions successfully. JCIDS defines a collaborative
process that utilizes joint concepts and integrated Architectural Descriptions to identify
prioritized capability gaps and integrated joint Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel,
Leadership and Education, Personnel, and Facilities (DOTMLPF) and policy approaches
(materiel and non-materiel) to resolve those gaps. JCIDS implements an integrated,
collaborative process to guide development of new capabilities through changes in joint
DOTMLPF and policy.
JCIDS process owners have written policy to support architecture requirements (i.e., specific
product sets required in specific documents, such as the Information Support Plan, Capability
Development Document, and Capability Production Document) that permits components and
lower echelon commands to invoke the JCIDS process for requirements at all levels.
Defense Acquisition System
The DAS exists to manage the nation’s investments in technologies, programs, and product
support necessary to achieve the National Security Strategy and support employment and
maintenance of the United States Armed Forces. The DAS uses Joint Concepts, integrated
architectures, and DOTMLPF analysis in an integrated, collaborative process to ensure that
desired capabilities are supported by affordable systems and other resources.
DoD Directive 5000.1 provides the policies and principles that govern the DAS. In turn, DoD
Instruction 5000.2, Operation of the DAS establishes the management framework for
translating mission needs and technology opportunities, based on approved mission needs
and requirements, into stable, affordable, and well-managed acquisition programs that
include weapon systems and automated information systems (AISs). The Defense Acquisition
Management Framework provides an event-based process where acquisition programs
advance through a series of milestones associated with significant program phases.
The USD (AT&L) leads the development of integrated plans or roadmaps using integrated
architectures as its base. DoD organizations use these roadmaps to conduct capability
assessments, guide systems development, and define the associated investment plans as the
basis for aligning resources and as an input to the Defense Planning Guidance (DPG),
Program Objective Memorandum (POM) development, and Program and Budget Reviews.
Systems Engineering
DoD Acquisition policy directs all programs responding to a capabilities or requirements
document, regardless of acquisition category, to apply a robust SE approach that balances
total system performance and total cost with the family-of-systems, and system-of-systems
context. Programs develop a Systems Engineering Plan (SEP) for Milestone Decision
Authority (MDA) that describes the program’s overall technical approach, including activities,
resources, measures (metrics), and applicable performance incentives.
SE processes are applied to allow an orderly progression from one level of development to
the next detailed level using controlled baselines. These processes are used for the system,
subsystems, and system components as well as for the supporting or enabling systems used
for the production, operation, training, support, and disposal of that system. Execution of
technical management processes and activities, such as trade studies or risk management
activities may point to specific requirements, interfaces, or design solutions as non-optimal
and suggest change to increase system-wide performance, achieve cost savings, or meet
scheduling deadlines.
Architecture supports SE by providing a structured approach to document design and
development decisions based on established requirements.
Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution
The PPBE process allocates resources within the DoD and establishes a framework and
process for decision-making on future programs. PPBE is a systematic process that guides
DoD’s strategy development, identification of needs for military capabilities, program
planning, resource estimation, and allocation, acquisition, and other decision processes.
6
=== page 7 ===
DoDAF Introduction
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/background.html[3/3/2011 3:33:50 PM]
JCIDS is a key supporting process for PPBE, providing prioritization and affordability advice.
DoDAF V2.0 supports the PPBE process by identifying the touch points between architecture
and the PPBE process, identifying the data to be captured within an Architectural
Description, facilitating informed decision-making, and identifying ways of presenting data to
various stakeholders/roles in the PPBE decision process.
Portfolio Management
DoD policy requires that IT investments be managed as portfolios to ensure IT investments
support the Department’s vision, mission, and goals; ensure efficient and effective delivery
of capabilities to the Warfighter; and maximize return on investment within the enterprise.
Each portfolio may be managed using the architectural plans, risk management techniques,
capability goals and objectives, and performance measures. Capability architecting is done
primarily to support the definition of capability requirements. PfM uses the Architectural
Description to analyze decisions on fielding or analysis of a needed capability.
Architectural support to PfM tends to focus on the investment decision itself (although not
exclusively), and assists in justifying investments, evaluating the risk, and providing a
capability gap analysis.
Operations
In most cases, an enterprise will capture its routine or repeatable business and mission
operations as architectural content. However, when the basic structure of an activity is very
stable and the activity repeated often, such as military operations planning or project
definition and management, the enterprise may choose to include that structure as part of
the Architectural Description itself. In this case, the architecture repository may be enhanced
to include templates, checklists, and other artifacts commonly used to support the activity.
The JCIDS, PPBE, and DAS processes establish a knowledge-based approach, which requires
program managers to attain the right knowledge at critical junctures to make informed
program decisions throughout the acquisition process. The DoD IT PfM process continues to
evolve that approach with emphasis on individual systems and/or services designed to
improve overall mission capability. Consistent with OMB Capital Planning and Investment
Control (CPIC) guidance, the DoD uses four continuous integrated activities to manage its
portfolios – analysis, selection, control, and evaluation. The overall process is iterative, with
results being fed back into the system to guide future decisions.
Go to top of page ↑
DM2 Support for the Six Core Processes DoDAF Supports
The DoDAF V2.0 Meta-model Groups support the viewpoints and DoD Key Processes of
JCIDS, DAS, PPBE, System Engineering, Operations, and Portfolio Management (IT and
Capability). The table below indicates a non-inclusive mapping of DoDAF Meta-model Groups
to the DoDAF Viewpoints and DoD Key Processes. The support for the Key Processes is for
the information requirements that were presented at the workshops for the key processes
and, as such, do not reflect all of the information requirements that a key process could
need.
DoDAF Meta-model Groups Mapping to Viewpoints and DoD Key Processes
Metamodel
Data Groups
View Points DoD Key Processes
AV, CV,
DIV,OV,PV,StdV,
SvcV, SV
JCIDS, DAS, PPBE, System Engineering,
Operations, Portfolio Management (IT
and Capability)
Performer
CV, OV,
PV,StdV, SvcV, J, D, P, S, O, C
7
=== page 8 ===
DoDAF Introduction
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/background.html[3/3/2011 3:33:50 PM]
SV
Activity OV J, O, C
Resource Flow AV, CV,
DIV,OV,PV,StdV J, S, O
Data and Information AV, DIV J, D, P, S, O, C
Capability CV, PV, SV,
SvcV J, D, P, S, O, C
Services CV, StdV, SV P, S, C
Project AV, CV, PV,
SvcV, SV D, P, S, C
Training/Skill/Education OV, SV, SvcV,
StdV J, S, O
Goals CV, PV J, D, P, O, C
Rules OV, StdV, SvcV,
SV J, D, S, O
Measures SvcV, SV J, D, S, O, C
Location SvcV, SV P, S, O
 
 Go to top of page ↑
What is New in DoDAF V2.0
The major changes for DoDAF V2.0 are:
The major emphasis on architecture development has changed from a product-centric
process to a data-centric process designed to provide decision-making data organized
as information for the manager.
Products have been replaced by views that represent specific types of presentation for
architectural data and derived information. With the focus on data, DoDAF V2.0 does
not have products but has DoDAF-described Models. Rather than the Operational
Viewpoint-5 (OV-5) Operational Activity Model Product, there is the Activity Model
with the same supporting data. This is shifting the focus of the architecture effort onto
the data early in the Architecture Development Process.
Architecture views are, in turn, organized into viewpoints, which provide a broad
understanding of the purpose, objectives, component parts, and capabilities
represented by the individual architectural views.
The three major viewpoints of architecture described in previous version (e.g.,
Operational, Technical, and System) have been changed to more specific viewpoints
that relate to the collection of architecture-related data which can be organized as
useful information for the manager in decision-making. To support customer
requirement and re-organization needs:
All the models of data—conceptual, logical, or physical—have been placed into
the Data and Information Viewpoint.
The Technical Standards Viewpoint has been updated to the Standards
Viewpoint and can describe business, commercial, and doctrinal standards, in
addition to technical standards.
The Operational Viewpoint now can describe rules and constraints for any
function (business, intelligence, warfighting, etc.) rather that just those derived
from data relationships.
Due to the emphasis within the Department on Capability PfM and feedback
from the Acquisition community, the Capability Viewpoint and Project Viewpoint
have been added.
8
=== page 9 ===
DoDAF Introduction
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/background.html[3/3/2011 3:33:50 PM]
 
System has changed from DoDAF V1.5. System is not just computer hardware and
computer software. System is now defined in the general sense of an assemblage of
components - machine, human - that perform activities (since they are subtypes of
Performer) and are interacting or interdependent. This could be anything, i.e.,
anything from small pieces of equipment that have interacting or interdependent
elements, to Family of Systems (FoS) and System of Systems (SoS). Note that
Systems are made up of Materiel (e.g., equipment, aircraft, and vessels) and
Personnel Types.
The Department initiatives for Architecture Federation and Tiered Responsibility have
been incorporated into Version 2.0.
Requirements for sharing of data and derived information in a Federated environment
are described.
Specific types of architecture within the Department have been identified and
described (e.g., Department-level [which includes Department, Capability &
Component architectures] and Solution Architectures).
The DoD Enterprise Architecture is described.
Linkages to the Federal Enterprise Architecture are defined and described.
Architecture constructs originally described in the UK Ministry of Defence Architecture
Framework (MODAF), the NATO Architecture Framework (NAF), and the Open Group
Architecture Framework (TOGAF) are adopted for use within DoDAF.
A DoDAF Meta-model (DM2), containing a Conceptual Data Model (CDM), a Logical
Data Model (LDM), and a Physical Exchange Specification (PES) has been created.
Approaches to SOA development are described and discussed.
For the architect, DoDAF V2.0 changes the focus of the Architecture Development
Process are described in “What Does the Architect Need to Do”? The basis of the
Architecture Development Process is now the Data Meta-model Groups, described in
the LDM.
To align with ISO Standards, where appropriate, the terminology has changed from
Views to Viewpoint (e.g., the Operational View is now the Operational Viewpoint).
DoDAF can capture the security markings and is described in the PES. In addition, a
discussion of the security characteristics mapped to the DoDAF Concepts  has been
added.
In DoDAF V1.5 and previous versions, Nodes are logical concepts that caused issues in
the exchange and discussion of architectures. In one architecture that was reviewed,
Operational Nodes mapped to System, Organization, Person Type, Facility, Materiel,
and Installation. Within the same architecture, System Node maps to System,
Materiel, Organization, and Location. The overlap Organizational and System nodes
(System, Organization, Material) illustrates the complexity of trying to define Nodes.
The concrete concepts of Node (including Activities, System, Organization, Person
Type, Facility, Location, Materiel, and Installation) were incorporated into the DoDAF
Meta-model. Since Nodes are logical concepts that could be used to represent the
more concrete concepts of activities, systems, organizations, personnel types,
facilities, locations, materiels, and installations or combinations of those things,
DoDAF V2.0 focuses on those concrete concepts. There will not be a mapping of Node
to the DoDAF V2.0 Meta-model Groups, concepts, classes, or associations. For the
architect, there are some changes in architecture development:
When appropriate, DoDAF V1.0 and V1.5 architectures that use the Node
concept will need to update the architecture to express the concrete concepts in
place of the abstract concept that Node represents. When pre-DoDAF V2.0
architecture is compared with DoDAF V2.0 architecture, the concrete concepts
that Node represents must be defined for the newer architecture.
DoDAF V2.0 architectures will need to express the concrete concepts (activities,
systems, organizations, personnel types, facilities, locations, materiels, and
installations, etc.).
9
=== page 10 ===
DoDAF Introduction
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/background.html[3/3/2011 3:33:50 PM]
 
Go to top of page ↑
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
10
=== page 11 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Architecture Development
6-Step Architecture Development Process
Architecture Development 6-Step Process
 
Step 1: Determine Intended Use of Architecture
Step 2: Determine Scope of Architecture
Step 3: Determine Data Required to Support Architecture Development
Step 4: Collect, Organize, Correlate, and Store Architectural Data
Step 5: Conduct Analyses in Support of Architecture Objectives
Step 6: Document Results in Accordance with Decision-Maker Needs
 
The high
-level, 6-step architecture development process provides guidance to the architect
and Architectural Description development team and emphasizes the guiding principles. The
process is data-centric rather than product-centric (e.g., it emphasizes focus on data, and
relationships among and between data, rather than DoDAF V1.0 or V1.5 products). This
data-centric approach ensures concordance between views in the Architectural Description
while ensuring that all essential data relationships are captured to support a wide variety of
analysis tasks. The views created as a result of the architecture development process
provide visual renderings of the underlying architectural data and convey information of
interest from the Architectural Description needed by specific user communities or decision
makers. The figure above depicts this 6-step process.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
11
=== page 12 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
NOTE: It is important to note that the development of Architectural Description is an
iterative process and a unique one, in that every Architectural Description is:
Different in that architecture creation serves a specific purpose, and is created from a
particular viewpoint.
Serving differing requirements, necessitating different types of views to represent the
collected data.
Representative of a 'snapshot in time' (e.g., the Architectural Description may
represent the current view or baseline, or it may represent a desired view in some
future time).
Changeable over time as requirements become more focused or additional knowledge
about a process or requirement becomes known.
The methodology described below is designed to cover the broadest possible set of
circumstances, and also to focus on the most commonly used steps by the architecture
community.
Step 1: Determine Intended Use of Architecture.  Defines the purpose and intended use
of the architecture ("Fit-for-Purpose"); how the Architectural Description effort will be
conducted; the methods to be used in architecture development; the data categories
needed; the potential impact on others; and the process by which success of the effort will
be measured in terms of performance and customer satisfaction. This information is
generally provided by the process owner to support architecture development describing
some aspect of their area of responsibility (process, activity, etc.).
A template for collection of high-level information relating to the purpose and scope of the
Architectural Description, its glossary, and other information, has been developed for
registration of that data in DARS.
Step 2: Determine Scope of Architecture.  The scope defines the boundaries that
establish the depth and breadth of the Architectural Description and establish the
architecture's problem set, helps define its context and defines the level of detail required for
the architectural content. While many architecture development efforts are similar in their
approach, each effort is also unique in that the desired results or effect may be quite
different. As an example, system development efforts generally focus first on process
change, and then concentrate on those automated functions supporting work processes or
activities. In addition to understanding the process, discovery of these 'system functions' is
important in deciding how to proceed with development or purchase of automation support.
Information collected for Architectural Descriptions describing services is similar to
information collected for Architectural Descriptions describing systems. For describing
services, Architectural Description will collect additional information concerning subscriptions,
directory services, distribution channels within the organization, and supporting
systems/communications web requirements.
Similar situations occur with Architectural Description development for joint operations. Joint
capabilities are defined processes with expected results, and expected execution capability
dates. The Architectural Descriptions supporting the development of these types of
capabilities usually require the reuse of data already established by the military services and
agencies, analyzed, and configured into a new or updated process that provides the desired
capability. Included are the processes needed for military service and/or agency response,
needed automation support, and a clear definition of both desired result and supporting
performance measures (metrics). These types of data are presented in models.
The important concept for this step is the clarity of scope of effort defined for the project
that enables an expected result. Broad scoping or unclear definition of the problem can delay
or prevent success. The process owner has the primary responsibility for ensuring that the
scoping is correct, and that the project can be successfully completed.
Clarity of scope can better be determined by defining and describing the data to be used in
the proposed Architectural Description in advance of the creation of views that present
12
=== page 13 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
desired data in a format useful to managers. Early identification of needed data, particularly
data about the Architectural Description itself, the subject-matter of the proposed
Architectural Description, and a review of existing data from COIs, can provide a rich source
for ensuring that Architectural Descriptions, when developed, are consistent with other
existing Architectural Descriptions. It also ensures conformance with any data-sharing
requirements within the Department or individual COIs, and conformant with the DM2.
An important consideration beginning with this and each subsequent step of the architecture
development process is the continual collection and recording of a consistent, harmonized,
and common vocabulary. The collection of terms should continue throughout the architecture
development process. As architectural data is identified to help clarify the appropriate scope
of the architecture effort, vocabulary terms and definitions should be disambiguated,
harmonized, and recorded in a consistent AV-2 process documented in the "DoDAF V2.0
Architecture Development Process for the DoDAF-described Models" Microsoft Project Plan .
Analysis of vocabularies across different Architectural Descriptions with similar scope may
help to clarify and determine appropriate Architectural Description scope. Specific examples
of data identification utilizing the AV-2 Data Dictionary construct are found in the DoDAF
Journal.
Step 3: Determine Data Required to Support Architecture Development.  The required
level of detail to be captured for each of the data entities and attributes is determined
through the analysis of the process undergoing review conducted during the scoping in Step
2. This includes the data identified as needed for execution of the process, and other data
required to effect change in the current process, (e.g., administrative data required by the
organization to document the Architectural Description effort). These considerations establish
the type of data collected in Step 4, which relate to the architectural structure, and the depth
of detail required.
The initial type of architectural data content to be collected is determined by the established
scope of the Architectural Description, and recorded as attributes, associations, and concepts
as described in the DM2. A mapping from DM2 concepts, associations, and attributes to
architecture models suggests relevant architectural views the architect may develop (using
associated architecture techniques) during the more comprehensive and coherent data
collection of Step 4. This step is normally completed in conjunction with Step 4, a bottom-up
approach to organized data collection, and Architectural Description development typically
iterates over these two steps. As initial data content is scoped, additional data scope may be
suggested by the more comprehensive content of Architectural Views desired for
presentation or decision-making purposes.
This step can often be simplified through reuse of data previously collected by others, but
relevant to the current effort. Access to appropriate COI data and other architecture
information, discoverable via DARS and the DMR, can provide information on data and other
architectural views that may provide useful in a current effort.
Work is presently underway within the Department to ensure uniform representation for the
same semantic content within architecture modeling, called Architecture Modeling Primitives.
The Architecture Modeling Primitives, hereafter referred to as Primitives, will be a standard
set of modeling elements, and associated symbols mapped to DM2 concepts and applied to
modeling techniques. Using the Primitives to support the collection of architecture content
and, in concert with the PES, will aid in generating common understanding and
communication among architects in regard to architectural views. As the Primitives concepts
are applied to more modeling techniques, they will be updated in the DoDAF Journal and
details provided in subsequent releases of DoDAF. When creating an OV-6c in Business
Process Modeling Notation (BPMN), the Primitives notation may be used. DoD has created
the notation and it is in the DoDAF Journal. The full range of Primitives for views, as with the
current BPMN Primitives, will be coordinated for adoption by architecture tool vendors.
Step 4: Collect, Organize, Correlate, and Store Architectural Data.  Architects typically
collect and organize data through the use of architecture techniques designed to use views
(e.g., activity, process, organization, and data models as views) for presentation and
13
=== page 14 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
decision-making purposes. The architectural data should be stored in a recognized
commercial or government architecture tool. Terms and definitions recorded are related to
elements of the (DM2).
Designation of a data structure for the Architectural Description effort involves creation of a
taxonomy to organize the collected data. This effort can be made considerably simpler by
leveraging existing, registered artifacts registered in DARS, to include data taxonomies and
data sets. Each COI maintains its registered data on DARS, either directly or through a
federated approach. In addition, some organizations, such as U.S. Joint Forces Command
(JFCOM), have developed templates, which provide the basis of a customizable solution to
common problems, or requirements, which includes datasets already described and
registered in the DMR. Examples of this template-based approach are in the DoDAF Journal.
DARS provides more information that is specific, and guidance on retrieving needed data
through a discovery process. Once registered data is discovered, the data can be cataloged
and organized within a focused taxonomy, facilitating a means to determine what new data
is required. New data is defined, registered in DARS, and incorporated into the taxonomy
structure to create a complete defined list of required data. The data is arranged for upload
to an automated repository to permit subsequent analysis and reuse. Discovery metadata
(i.e., the metadata that identifies a specific Architectural Description, its data, views, and
usage) should be registered in DARS as soon as it is available to support discovery and
enable federation. Architects and data managers should use the DoD EA Business Reference
Model (DoD EA BRM) taxonomy elements as the starting point for their registration efforts.
Additional discovery metadata, such as processes and services may be required later, and
should follow the same registration process.
Step 5: Conduct Analyses in Support of Architecture Objectives.  Architectural data
analysis determines the level of adherence to process owner requirements. This step may
also identify additional process steps and data collection requirements needed to complete
the Architectural Description and better facilitate its intended use. Validation applies the
guiding principles, goals, and objectives to the process requirement, as defined by the
process owner, along with the published performance measures (metrics), to determine the
achieved level of success in the Architectural Description effort. Completion of this step
prepares the Architectural Description for approval by the process owner. Changes required
from the validation process, result in iteration of the architecture process (repeat steps 3
through 5 as necessary).
Step 6: Document Results in Accordance with Decision-Maker Needs.  The final step
in the architecture development process involves creation of architectural views based on
queries of the underlying data. Presenting the architectural data to varied audiences requires
transforming the architectural data into meaningful presentations for decision-makers. This is
facilitated by the data requirements determined in Step 3, and the data collection methods
employed during Step 4.
DoDAF V2.0 provides for models and views. DoDAF-described Models are those models that
enable an architect and development team whose data has already been defined and
described consistent with the DM2. The models become views when they are populated with
architectural data. These models include those previously described in earlier versions of
DoDAF, along with new models incorporated from the MODAF, the NATO NAF, and TOGAF
that have relevance to DoD architecture development efforts.
Fit-for-Purpose Views are user-defined views that an architect and development team can
create to provide information necessary for decision-making in a format customarily used in
an agency. These views should be developed consistent with the DM2, but can be in formats
(e.g., dashboards, charts, graphical representations) that are normally used in an agency for
briefing and decision purposes. An Architectural Description development effort can result in
an Architectural Description that is a combination of DoDAF-described Models and Fit-for-
Purpose Views.
DoDAF does not require specific models or views, but suggests that local organizational
presentation types that can utilize DoDAF-created data are preferred for management
14
=== page 15 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
presentation. A number of available architecture tools support the creation of views
described in this step. The PES provides the format for data sharing.
NOTE: DoDAF V2.0 does NOT prescribe a Physical Data Model, leaving that task to the
software developers who will implement the principles and practices of DoDAF in their
own software offerings.
 
Scoping Architectures to be "Fit-for-Purpose"
Establishing the scope of an architecture is critical to ensuring that its purpose and use are
consistent with specific project goals and objectives. The term “Fit-for-Purpose” is used in
DoDAF to describe an architecture (and its views) that is appropriately focused (i.e.,
responds to the stated goals and objectives of process owner, is useful in the decision-
making process, and responds to internal and external stakeholder concerns. Meeting
intended objectives means those actions that either directly support customer needs or
improve the overall process undergoing change. The architect is the technical expert who
translates the decision-maker’s requirements into a set of data that can be used by
engineers to design possible solutions. At each tier of the DoD, goals and objectives, along
with corresponding issues that may exist should be addressed according to the established
scope and purpose, (e.g., Departmental, Capability, SE, and Operational), as shown in the
notional diagram in the figure below.
Establishing the Scope for Architecture Development
Establishing a scope for an architecture effort at any tier is similarly critical in determining
the architecture boundaries (Purpose and Use expected), along with establishing the data
categories needed for analysis and management decision-making. Scope also defines the
key players whose input, advice, and consensus is needed to successfully architect and
implement change (i.e., Stakeholders, both internal and external). Importantly, scope also
determines the goals and objectives of the effort, consistent with both boundaries and
15
=== page 16 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
stakeholders; since goals and objectives define both the purpose for architecture creation
and the level of the architecture. Establishing the scope of an effort also determines the level
of complexity for data collection and information presentation.
Architecture development also requires an understanding of external requirements that may
influence architecture creation. An architecture developed for an internal agency purpose still
needs to be mappable, and consistent with, higher level architectures, and mappable to the
DoD EA. For some architecture developments, consideration must be given in data collection
and graphical presentation to satisfaction of other external requirements, such as upward
reporting and submission of architectural data and models for program review, funding
approval, or budget review due to the sensitivity or dollar value of the proposed solution.
This site contains guidance on data collection for specific views required by instruction,
regulation, or other regulatory guidance (i.e., Exhibit 53, or Exhibit 300 submissions; OMB
Segment architecture reviews, or interoperability requirements).
Architecture scoping must facilitate alignment with, and support the decision-making process
and ultimately mission outcomes and objectives as shown in the figure below. Architectural
data and supporting views, created from organizing raw data into useful information, and
collected into a useful viewpoint, should enable domain experts, program managers, and
decision makers to utilize the architecture to locate, identify, and resolve definitions,
properties, facts, constraints, inferences, and issues, both within and across architectural
boundaries that are redundant, conflicting, missing, and/or obsolete. DoDAF V2.0 provides
the flexibility to develop both Fit-for-Purpose Views (User-developed Views) and views from
DoDAF-described Models to maximize the capability for decision-making at all levels. The
figure below shows how the development of architectures supports the management decision
process. In this case, the example shows how an architecture and the use of it in analysis
can facilitate the ability to determine and/or validate mission outcome.
Analysis also uncovers the effect and impact of change (“what if”) when something is
redefined, redeployed, deleted, moved, delayed, accelerated, or no longer funded. Having a
disciplined process for architecture development in support of analytics will produce quality
results, not be prone to misinterpretations, and therefore, be of high value to decision
makers and mission outcomes.
Mission Outcomes Supported by Architectures
 
Enterprise Architecture
“Today, the encouraging coalescence among leaders is that many enterprise
systems have the same architectural approach—although not all express it in the
same way. A similar convergence addresses the kinds of techniques, pattern, and
16
=== page 17 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
 designs that  are independent of specific application domains, and that enable
effective production of responsive, scalable, flexible, and unifiable enterprise
applications.”
 
Within DoD,
 Enterprise Architecture (EA) has been seen for many years as providing
product-oriented insight into a wide range of data, programs, and activities, organized
through Communities of Interest (COI). The data-centric approach to DoDAF V2.0 is
designed to facilitate the reuse and sharing of COI data. Since DoDAF provides the
conceptual, logical, and PES but does not otherwise prescribe the configuration of the
product composition, architects and stakeholders are free to create their views of data that
best serve their needs.
Introduction and Overview
An Architectural Description is a strategic information asset that describes the current and/or
desired relationships between an organization’s business, mission and management
processes, and the supporting infrastructure. Architectural Descriptions define a strategy for
managing change, along with transitional processes needed to evolve the state of a business
or mission to one that is more efficient, effective, current, and capable of providing those
actions needed to fulfill its goals and objectives. Architectural Descriptions may illustrate an
organization, or a part of it, as it presently exists; any changes desired (whether operational
or technology-driven); and the strategies and projects employed to achieve the desired
transformation. An Architectural Description also defines principles and goals and sets
direction on issues, such as the promotion of interoperability, intra-, and interagency
information sharing, and improved processes, that facilitate key DoD program decisions.
Such support extends beyond details or summaries of operational and systems solutions,
and includes program plans, programmatic status reporting, financial and budget
relationships, and risk management. In addition to detailed views of individual solutions, the
framework supports the communication of enterprise-wide views and goals that illustrate the
context for those solutions, and the interdependencies among the components. Beyond the
solution space, standard mechanisms for communicating program plans, financial
information, and project status are established so that executives and managers can
evaluate and direct their programs.
The DoD EA is an Architectural Description that is an enterprise asset used to assess
alignment with the missions of the DoD enterprise, to strengthen customer support, to
support capability portfolio management (PfM), and to ensure that operational goals and
strategies are met. The DoD EA is shown below. It is comprised of DoD architecture policy,
tools, and standards, DoD-level Architectural Descriptions like the DoD Information
Enterprise Architecture (DoD IEA), DoD-level Capability Architectural Descriptions, and
Component Architectural Descriptions. Its purposes are to guide investment portfolio
strategies and decisions, define capability and interoperability requirements, provide access
to Segment architecture information, to establish and enforce standards, guide security and
information assurance requirements across the Department of Defense, and provide a sound
basis for transition from the existing DoD environment to the future. The DoD EA is a
federation of Architectural Descriptions with which Solution Architectural Descriptions must
conform. Its content includes but is not limited to rules, standards, services and systems
lifecycle information needed to optimize and maintain a process, or part of a process that a
self-sufficient organization wants to create and maintain by managing its IT portfolio. The
DoD EA provides a strategy that enables the organization to support its current operations
while serving as the roadmap for transitioning to its target environment. Transition
processes include an organization’s PfM, PPBE, and EA planning processes, along with
services and systems lifecycle methodologies.
17
=== page 18 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
Components of the DoD EA
The JCA portfolios describe future, required operational, warfighting, business, and Defense
intelligence capabilities, together with the systems and services required. They provide the
organizing construct for aligning and federating DoD EA content to support the Department
portfolio management structure. The description of the future DoD operating environment
and associated capability requirements represent the target architecture of the DoD EA.
These are time-phased as determined by functional owners and JCA developers.
Migration in a net-centric operating environment from the “As-Is” to the “To-Be” requires
that the DoD Information Environment Architecture (DoD IEA) and the Net-Centric strategies
act as uniform references for, and guide the transition sequence to ensure that both
operational/business capabilities and IT capabilities, as required, are properly described.
Policy is being developed by the DoD CIO to describe how federation will be used to mature
the DoD EA as well as its relationship to federated, solution Architectural Descriptions.
Transition Planning
As discussed above, one major impetus for creating and using Architectural Descriptions is to
guide acquisition and development of new enterprises, capabilities and systems or
improvements to existing ones. Earlier versions of DoDAF addressed this need exclusively
using “As-Is” and “To-Be” Architectural Descriptions, along with a Systems and/or Services
Technology Forecast. The “As-Is” and “To-Be” concepts are time-specific snapshots of
DoDAF views that initially served as the endpoints of a transition process. However, this
transition strategy has several potential pitfalls, to include the difficulty in accurately
representing the “As-Is” starting point where legacy systems are sometimes poorly
documented, and processes are largely undefined. There is also the consideration that long-
term goals are often very flexible, resulting in flux in the “To-Be” version.
Since the “As-Is” and “To-Be” Architectural Descriptions are time-specific versions of similar
sets of data with similar viewpoints, transition planning is able to chart an evolutionary path
from the “As-Is” to its corresponding “To-Be” architectural vision given a clear
understanding of the expected outcomes or objectives through some future (perhaps
undefined) future point. It is expected that the To-Be Architectural Descriptions will change
over time as Departmental priorities shift and realign.
Federated Approach to DoD Architecture Management
The Department has adopted a federated approach to distributed architectural data
18
=== page 19 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
collection, organization, and management among the Services, Agencies and COIs as its
means of developing the DoD Enterprise Architecture, with a virtual rather than physical data
set described through supporting documentation and architectural views. This approach
provides increased flexibility while retaining significant oversight and quality management
services at the Departmental level. Detailed guidance on the DoD federation approach will be
contained in DoDD 8210, “Architecting the DoD Enterprise.”
Tiered Accountability
Tiered Accountability (TA) is the distribution of authority and responsibility to a DoD
organization for an element of the DoD EA. Under TA, DoD is defining and building
enterprise-wide capabilities that include data standards, business rules, enabling systems,
and an associated layer of interfaces for Department, specified segments of the enterprise
(e.g., JCA, DoD Components), and Programmatic solutions. Each tier has specific goals, as
well as responsibilities to the tiers above or below them.
Architectural Descriptions are categorized when developed to facilitate alignment (mapping
and linking), cataloging, navigating, and searching disparate architecture information in a
DoD registry of holdings. All Architectural Descriptions developed by the tiers should be
federated, as described in the DoD Federation Strategy.
Alignment in the tiers is required for the DoD EA to be discoverable, shareable, and
interoperable. Architectural Descriptions can also support many goals within the tiers, each
of which may imply specific requirements for structure, content, or level of detail. Alignment
decisions should balance the interdependence of Architectural Descriptions with the need for
local flexibility to address local issues. Alignment describes the minimum constraints needed
to ensure consistency across architecture levels. Architectural Descriptions often relate at
some ‘touch point’ to other Architectural Descriptions on the same level, level(s) above, or
level(s) below, and should be discovered and utilized in the development of Architectural
Descriptions to ensure that appropriate linkages are created and maintained. The need to
plan for them implies that each Architectural Description sharing a touch-point should be
available to architects on both sides. The DMR for data and the DARS for architecture
registration facilitate the ability to discover and utilize architectural data, with the caveat
that any touch-points within the purview of an established COI adhere to COI guidance.
DoD Architecture Enterprise Services
The next generation of DoD Enterprise Architectures will be constructed by employing a set
of DoD Architecture Enterprise Services (DAES) for registering, discovering, aligning,
translating, and utilizing architectural data, and derived information to support key DoD
decision processes through implementing the concepts of the DoD Net-Centric Strategies.
DAES will be implemented using Web Services, in which specific content and/or functionality
is provided by one user for others, many of whom may be unknown to the provider. An
Operational Resource Flow Description (A redesigned Operational Viewpoint 2 (OV-2)
DoDAF-described Model) has been retained in DoDAF V2.0 to describe those services that
can be discovered and subscribed from one or more specific sources and delivered to one or
more known or unknown subscribers.
Registration of architectures, one of the goals of the NCDS , is the first step toward enabling
discovery of architecture metadata. DAES includes a registration service to register the
metadata (through the DMR), and a method to describe the purpose and scope of an
Architectural Description (through DARS). The registration service will enable cataloging of
Architectural Descriptions in federated repositories, and, once complete, Architectural
Descriptions are ‘available’ for discovery. When an Architectural Description is discoverable,
it can be aligned to, linked to, or re-used by other Architectural Descriptions. The discovery
service enables users to execute a federated search for architecture holdings meeting
specified search parameters.
Alignment to the Federal Enterprise Architecture
The OMB established the Federal Enterprise Architecture (FEA) program in 2003 to build a
comprehensive business-driven blueprint of the entire Federal Government. OMB’s Circular
19
=== page 20 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
A-11 requires that Cabinet-level agencies, including the DoD, link their budget submissions
to the FEA, and annually evaluates those submissions through the Enterprise Architecture
Assessment Program, which establishes an evaluation score for overall agency progress.
The core principles of the FEA program are:
Business-driven approach.
Promote collaboration of effort and reuse.
Improve efficiency and effectiveness of business operations through the use of
enterprise architecture for the capital investment process.
Demonstrate cost savings and cost avoidance through improved core processes, and
cross-agency sharing and mutual investment.
DoD leverages the FEA construct and core principles to provide the Department with the
enterprise management information it needs to achieve its own strategic transformation
goals and respond to upward reporting requirements of OMB. The primary objective is to
improve DoD performance, using EA, by providing a framework for cross-mission analysis
and identification of gaps and redundancies; and by developing transition plans and target
architectures that will help move DoD to the net-centric environment.
Several Federal and DoD-specific EA artifacts exist that describe enterprise-level
management information. These include:
The President’s Management Agenda.
OMB A-11 Exhibit 300 submissions.
OMB FEA Practice Guidance.
OMB EA Assessment Guide.
OMB FEA Reference Models.
DoD EA Reference Model (RM) Taxonomy.
DoD EA Consolidated RM.
DoD EA Transition Strategy.
DoD Segment Architectures.
DoD EA Self-Assessment.
DoD Architecture Federation Strategy.
These artifacts facilitate the alignment with the FEA, contribute to a broader understanding
of architecture alignment, provide a basis for federated Architectural Descriptions, promote a
more efficient and effective use of assets, and ultimately lead to better decision-making.
When developing architectures, particularly at the Departmental and Component levels,
alignment with the FEA is accomplished by utilizing the Federal Enterprise Architecture-
Consolidated Reference Model (FEA-CRM) documents together with DoD documents and
references as a basis for defining processes, data, services, and technical standards. As an
example, when a process owner determines that an Architectural Description is needed for
some specific purpose, the first references to use are as shown below, as well as other
Architectural Descriptions above and below the level of the Architectural Description under
development. The DoD-level information is contained in the DoD EA Reference Models, along
with the implementing guidance, standards, and descriptions of Department-wide
information that is mapped to the FEA-CRM in accordance with the FEA construct.
References to Architectural Description Development
Resource Description Architecture Use
Determine
Processes
Involved
DoDAF
FEA Business
Reference Model
(BRM)
(DoDAF) Determine techniques and notation to be
used
(FEA BRM) Determine FEA business processes to align
to; use taxonomies in BRM to name processes
Identify and
Define data
DM2 (DM2)
FEA Data Reference
(DM2) Data Group and metadata structures
(DRM) Existing Government-wide metadata for
20
=== page 21 ===
DoDAF Architecture Development - 6 Step Process
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/arch_development.html[3/3/2011 3:33:54 PM]
Model (DRM) linkage to architecture
Document
Architectural
Description
and Ensure
Compliance
DoDAF
DoD Metadata
Registry (DMR) DoD
Architecture
Registry System
(DARS) Toolset
OMB EA Guidance
Federated
Enterprise
Architecture-
Consolidated
Reference Model
(FEA-CRM)
OMB EA Assessment
Guide
(DoDAF) provides described models, and guidance on
creating Fit-for-Purpose Views for presentation
purposes
(DMR) Provides existing metadata to use in
conjunction with DMR to create data required
(DARS) provides registration services for architecture
discovery
(Toolset) provides automated notation method for
creating views
(OMB EA Guidance) provides information on required
format and content of EA for OMB 53/300 process
(OMB EA Assess. Guide) provides guidance on
evaluation of architectures submitted to OMB for
review
Publish
Architecture
DoD Architecture
Federation Strategy
Agency Repository
DARS
(DoD Fed. Strategy) provides guidance on
architectural data discovery (Agency Repository)
stores EA Data (DARS) Providers EA contact
information
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
21
=== page 22 ===
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DM2.html[3/3/2011 3:34:01 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Meta-Model (DM2)
The Purpose of the DoDAF Meta Model (DM2)
The purpose of DoDAF is to define concepts and models usable in DoD’s six core processes:
1. Capabilities Integration and Development (JCIDS)
2. Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution (PPBE)
3. Acquisition System (DAS)
4. Systems Engineering (SE)
5. Operations Planning
6. Capabilities Portfolio Management (CPM)
In addition, DoDAF 2.0’s specific goals were to:
1. Establish guidance for architecture content as a function of purpose – “fit for purpose”
2. Increase utility and effectiveness of architectures via a rigorous data model   – 
the
DoDAF Meta Model (DM2) -- so the architectures can be integrated, analyzed, and
evaluated to mathematical precision.
The purposes of the DM2 are:
1. Establish and define the constrained vocabulary for description and discourse about
DoDAF models (formerly “products”) and their usage in the 6 core processes
2. Specify the semantics and format for federated EA data exchange
between:architecture development and analysis tools and architecture databases
across the DoD Enterprise Architecture (EA) Community of Interest (COI) and with
other authoritative data sources
3. Support discovery and understandability of EA data:
Discovery of EA data using DM2 categories of information
Understandability of EA data using DM2’s precise semantics augmented with
linguistic traceability (aliases)
4. Provide a basis for semantic precision  in 
architectural descriptions to support
heterogeneous architectural description integration and analysis in support of core
process decision making. 
The DM2 
defines architectural data elements and enables the integration and federation of
Architectural Descriptions. It establishes a basis for semantic (i.e., understanding)
consistency within and across Architectural Descriptions. In this manner, the DM2 supports
the exchange and reuse of architectural information among JCAs, Components, and Federal
and Coalition partners, thus facilitating the understanding and implementation of
interoperability of processes and systems. As the DM2 matures to meet the ongoing data
requirements of process owners, decision makers, architects, and new technologies, it will to
a resource that more completely supports the requirements for architectural data, published
in a consistently understandable way, and will enable greater ease for discovering, sharing,
and reusing architectural data across organizational boundaries.
To facilitate the use of information at the data layer, the DoDAF describes a set of models for
visualizing data through graphic, tabular, or textual means. These views relate to
stakeholder requirements for producing an Architectural Description.
What and Where is the DM2
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
22
=== page 23 ===
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DM2.html[3/3/2011 3:34:01 PM]
In accordance with standard data modeling conventions, the DM2 has several levels, as
shown in the figure below.
DM2's Three Levels
Each of these is important to a particular viewer of Departmental processes.
1. The conceptual level or Conceptual Data Model (CDM) defines the high-level data
constructs from which Architectural Descriptions are created in non-technical terms,
so that executives and managers at all levels can understand the data basis of
Architectural Description.
2. The Logical Data Model (LDM)  adds technical information, such as attributes to the
CDM and, when necessary, clarifies relationships into an unambiguous usage
definition.
3. The Physical Exchange Specification (PES) consists of the LDM with general data
types specified and implementation attributes (e.g., source, date) added, and then
generated as an  XSD.
The DM2 
consists of the following data items:
The LDM and PES can be obtained from the DoD Meta Data Registry (MDR) ARCH
namespace. The ARCH namespace serves the DoD EA Community of Interest (COI). The DoD
MDR is the authoritative source for all DoD metadata. This DoDAF site contains CDM as well
as LDM, PES, and ontology documentation.
23
=== page 24 ===
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DM2.html[3/3/2011 3:34:01 PM]
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
24
=== page 25 ===
DM2 - The DoDAF Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/conceptual.html[3/3/2011 3:36:57 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
The DM2 Conceptual Data Model
Relationship to Universal Core and the Zachman Framework interrogatives
Relationship of DM2 Principal Elements to DoD's Six Core Processes
Overview of The DM2 Foundation
The CDM defines concepts involving high-level data constructs from which Architectural
Descriptions are created, enabling executives and managers at all levels to understand the
data basis of Architectural Description. The key concepts are as follows:
1. Activity: Work, not specific to a single organization, weapon system or individual that
transforms inputs (Resources) into outputs (Resources) or changes their state.
2. Resource: Data, Information, Performers, Materiel, or Personnel Types that are
produced or consumed.
Materiel: Equipment, apparatus or supplies that are of interest, without
distinction as to its application for administrative or combat purposes.
Information: The state of a something of interest that is materialized -- in any
medium or form -- and communicated or received.
Data: Representation of information in a formalized manner suitable for
communication, interpretation, or processing by humans or by automatic
means. Examples could be whole models, packages, entities, attributes,
classes, domain values, enumeration values, records, tables, rows,
columns, and fields.
Architectural Description: Information describing an architecture such
as an OV-5b Operational Activity Model.
Performer: Any entity - human, automated, or any aggregation of human
and/or automated - that performs an activity and provides a capability.
Organization: A specific real-world assemblage of people and other
resources organized for an on-going purpose.
System: A functionally, physically, and/or behaviorally related group of
regularly interacting or interdependent elements.
Person Type: A category of persons defined by the role or roles they
share that are relevant to an architecture.
Service: A mechanism to enable access to a set of one or more
capabilities, where the access is provided using a prescribed interface
and is exercised consistent with constraints and policies as specified by
the service description. The mechanism is a Performer. The capabilities
accessed are Resources -- Information, Data, Materiel, Performers, and
Geo-political Extents.
3. Capability: The ability to achieve a Desired Effect under specified (performance)
standards and conditions through combinations of ways and means (activities and
resources) to perform a set of activities.
4. Condition: The state of an environment or situation in which a Performer performs.
5. Desired Effect: A desired state of a Resource.
6. Measure: The magnitude of some attribute of an individual.
7. Measure Type: A category of Measures.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
 
Department of Defense
25
=== page 26 ===
DM2 - The DoDAF Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/conceptual.html[3/3/2011 3:36:57 PM]
8. Location: A point or extent in space that may be referred to physically or logically.
9. Guidance: An authoritative statement intended to lead or steer the execution of
actions.
Rule: A principle or condition that governs behavior; a prescribed guide for
conduct or action.
Agreement: A consent among parties regarding the terms and
conditions of activities that said parties participate in.
Standard: A formal agreement documenting generally accepted
specifications or criteria for products, processes, procedures, policies,
systems, and/or personnel.
10. Project: A temporary endeavor undertaken to create Resources or Desired Effects.
11. Vision: An end that describes the future state of the enterprise, without regard to
how it is to be achieved; a mental image of what the future will or could be like.
12. Skill: The ability, coming from one's knowledge, practice, aptitude, etc., to do
something well.
Additional CDM concepts are identified and defined in DoDAF-DM2 Data Dictionary. 
The CDM also describes the relationships among data constructs in relatively non-technically
and easily understood terms. The figure below is a graphical representation of the CDM.
DM2 Conceptual Data Model (DIV-1) Diagram
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
26
=== page 27 ===
DM2 - The DoDAF Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/conceptual2.html[3/3/2011 3:46:36 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
DM2 CDM Relationship to Universal Core and Zachman Framework
Interrogatives
Relationship of DM2 Principal Elements to DoD's Six Core Processes
Overview of the DM2 Ontologic Foundation
The DM2 CDM relates to Universal Core and the Zachman Framework interrogatives as
shown in the figure below. Specifically:
1. The Data Description — What (we generalize to other Resources besides just Data)
2. The Function Description — How (and also the Performer that performs the Function,
Measures, Rules, and Conditions associated with)
3. The Network Description — Where (generalized)
4. The People Description — Who (we include Organizations)
5. The Time Description — When
6. The Motivation Description — Why (broadened to include Capability requirements)
Overlay of UCORE and Zachman Framework Interrogatives with DM2 CDM
(click to enlarge)
 
 
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
 
Department of Defense
27
=== page 28 ===
DM2 - The DoDAF Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/conceptual2.html[3/3/2011 3:46:36 PM]
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
28
=== page 29 ===
DM2 - The DoDAF Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/conceptual3.html[3/3/2011 3:46:38 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
Relationship of DM2 Principal Elements to DoD's Six Core Processes
Relationship to Universal Core and the Zachman Framework interrogatives
Overview of the DM2 Ontologic Foundation
DM2 and Core Process Relationships Overview
An overview of the role of the concepts modeled in the DM2 is shown in the table below.   The
key 
to the symbols in this table are at the bottom:
Mapping of DM2 CDM Core Concepts to DoD Core Processes DoDAF Supports
 
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
 
Department of Defense
29
=== page 30 ===
DM2 - The DoDAF Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/conceptual3.html[3/3/2011 3:46:38 PM]
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
30
=== page 31 ===
DM2 - The DoDAF Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/conceptual4.html[3/3/2011 3:46:40 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
Overview of the DM2 Ontologic Foundation
Relationship to Universal Core and the Zachman Framework interrogatives
Relationship of DM2 Principal Elements to DoD's Six Core Processes
Underlying the DM2 is a foundation of common ontologic constructs that facilitate the reuse
of common data patterns, an overview of which is shown in the figure below.
Overview of DM2 Foundation
 
The top
-level foundation elements are:
1. Thing, similar to other model’s object.
2. Individual, a thing that exists as an indivisible whole, or as a single member of a
category.
3. Type, a set of individuals or classes of other sets or classes.
4. Tuple, ordered places of things (e.g., a block in a spreadsheet or a table).
These foundation elements are similar to many other foundation high-level data constructs
that exist in the industry. The common patterns that are reused are:
1. Composition (or whole-part).
2. Super/Sub Type (or generalization/specialization, e.g., tank or main battle tank).
3. Before /After, for things that have time-related relationships in their Type.
4. Overlap, e.g., for things that can exchange other things that are parts of themselves,
things that occur at overlapping times and overlapping places.
Composition and Super/Sub Type apply to almost all architecture concepts. Before/After is
frequently used to model before/after situations, while Interface applies to few concepts,
limited at this time to the pattern describing Activity.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
31
=== page 32 ===
DM2 - The DoDAF Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/conceptual4.html[3/3/2011 3:46:40 PM]
The benefits of adopting the IDEAS formal foundation and common patterns are:
1. Re-use of common patterns saved a lot of work
2. Model compactness through inheritance of superclass properties and common patterns
3. Reconciliation and analysis tool.  The 
agreed-upon analysis principles provide a
principled basis for issue analysis
4. Information pedigree model
5. Design reification and requirements traceability
6. Services description
7. Semantic precision.  Improved 
ability to integrate and analyze multiple heterogeneous
EA datasets to fulfill EA purposes. 
8. Mathematical precision
These
 benefits are described in detail in the DM2 Physical Exchange Specification description
documents.
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
32
=== page 33 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical.html[3/3/2011 3:36:39 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
How to Use the DODAF Meta Model (DM2)
DM2 Data Dictionary and Model Files
- Download the DM2 EA 2.02 file
- Interactive version of the DM2
- Download the DM2 Data Dictionary
LDM Diagramming and Use of UML as an Ontology Diagramming Tool
Presentation Types for DM2 Data
DM2 Data Groups
For ease of understanding; the DM2 LDM is presented in groups of semantically related
concepts into clusters. These clusters
 are categorized as Principle Architectural Constructs
and Supporting Architectural Constructs. The Principle
 Architectural Constructs are the
fundamental building blocks necessary to describe an enterprise's internal and external
behavior and structure. These are
 as follows:
Performers: Any entity  - human, automated, or any aggregation of human
and/or automated - that performs an activity and provides a capability.
Resource Flows: The behavioral  and structural representation of the interactions
between Activities (which are performed by Performers) that is both temporal
and results in the flow or exchange of objects such as information, data,
materiel, and performers.
Information and Data: Representations (descriptions)  of things of interest and
necessary for the conduct of activities. Information is the state of a something
of interest that is materialized -- in any medium or form -- and communicated
or received.
Rules: How rules,  standards, agreements, constraints, and regulations and are
relevant to architectures. A principle or condition that governs behavior; a
prescribed guide for conduct or action
Goals: How goals,  visions, objectives, and effects relate and bear on
architectures. A desired state of a Resource
Capability: The ability  to achieve a Desired Effect under specified [performance]
standards and conditions through combinations of ways and means [activities
and resources] to perform a set of activities.
Services: A mechanism  to enable access to a set of one or more capabilities ,
where the access is provided using a prescribed interface and is exercised
consistent with constraints and policies as specified by the service description.
The mechanism is a Performer. The "capabilities" accessed are Resources --
Information, Data, Materiel, Performers, and Geo-political Extents.
Project: All forms  of planned activities that are responsive to visions, goals, and
objectives that aim to change the state of some situation.  A temporary
endeavor
 undertaken to create Resources or Desired Effects.
Reification: The process  of reifying or to regard (something abstract) as a
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
33
=== page 34 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical.html[3/3/2011 3:36:39 PM]
material or concrete thing. Reification, in  DoDAF 2, is used to introduce the
concept of the varying levels of architectural descriptions or refinement and
traceability between the levels.
Organizational Structure: Representations of  the organization types,
organizations and individuals that is present in the architecture.
The Supporting Architectural Constructs providing architectural properties and attributes are
as follows:
Measures: All form  of measures (metrics) applicable to architectures including
needs satisfaction measures, performance measures, interoperability measures,
organizational measures, and resource physical measures (e.g., mass.). The
magnitude of
 some attribute of an individual.
Locations: A point  or extent in space that may be referred to physically or
logically.
Pedigree: The origin  and the history of something; broadly: background,
history.
 
Go to top of page ↑
 
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
34
=== page 35 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical_1-1.html[3/3/2011 3:42:25 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
How to Use the DODAF Meta Model (DM2)
DM2 Data Dictionary and Model Files
The DM2 LDM description provides the essential aspects of the standard terminology used as
the basis of DoDAF 2.0. The DM2 provides the standard data lexicon definitions and the
logical relationships between elements of the lexicon. The DM2 defines the common
architectural description lexicon across the 6 major processes of the DoD. That terminology
and its mapping to other widely-used terms is contained in the DM2 Data Dictionary. The
DM2 Data Dictionary is maintained in Microsoft Excel and has the following structure.
 
It is
 best used using:
a. Microsoft Excel data filters to see only the items of interest. This is particularly useful
when examining the "monster matrix", by filtering to the DM2 elements that are
necessary or optional in a view.
b. Microsoft Excel "freeze panes" to view columns far to the right.
c. Row and/or column grouping (some are already included) or hiding to see the
information of interest. For instance, you may interested in the "monster matrix" but
not the definitions, sources, etc.
To download the DM2 Data Dictionary, click here.
The detailed model description including the detailed definitions, relationships and the lexicon
mapping to the DoDAF 2.0 views (models) are available as an Enterprise Architect (SPARX)
file that can be viewed using a licensed copy of Enterprise Architect or a free viewer only.
Since the DM2 is based on IDEAS, not UML, to see the diagrams correctly, an IDEAS profile
should be installed.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
35
=== page 36 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical_1-1.html[3/3/2011 3:42:25 PM]
a. To download the DM2 EA file, click here.
b. To navigate to the SPARX EA-lite site, click here.
c. To navigate to the IDEAS Group site to download the IDEAS profile, click here.
 
Go to top of page ↑
 
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
36
=== page 37 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical_1-2.html[3/3/2011 3:42:55 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
How to Use the DODAF Meta Model (DM2)
LDM Diagramming and Use of UML as an Ontology Diagramming Tool
The IDEAS Model is represented in UML. The UML language is not ideally suited to ontology
specification in its native form. The UML language can be extended through the use of
profiles. The IDEAS Model has been developed using a UML Profile - any UML elements that
are not stereotyped by one of the IDEAS foundation elements will not be considered part of
an IDEAS ontology. The IDEAS Foundation specifies the fundamental types that define the
profile stereotypes. The super-subtype structure in IDEAS is quite comprehensive, and
showing the super-type relationships on some diagrams can result in a number of crossed
lines. In these cases, supertypes of a given type will be listed in italic text in the top-right-
hand corner of the UML element box.
The stereotype of an element in an IDEAS UML model is shorthand for the element being an
instance of the type referred to by the Stereotype, though the type must be one that has
been defined in the root package of the foundation. Hence, if the stereotype is < > then the
element is an instance of an Individual. The following stereotyped classes, with their color-
coding are used in the model:
a. <<Individual>> An instance of an Individual - something with spatio-temporal extent
[Color Name: Grey(80%), Color Codes: R40 G40 B40]
b. <<Type>> The specification of a Type [Color Name: Pale Blue, Color Code: R153
G204 B255]
c. <<IndividualType>> The specification of a Type whose members are Individuals
[Color Name: Light Orange, Color Codes: R255 G173 B91]
d. <<TupleType>> The specification of a Type whose members are tuples [Color Name:
Light Green, Color Codes: R204 G255 B204]
e. <<Powertype>> The specification of a Type that is the set of all subsets of a given
Type [Color Name: Lavender, Color Codes: R204 G153 B255]
f. <<Name>> The specification of a name, with the exemplar text provided as a tagged
value [Color Name: Tan, Color Codes: R255 G254 B153]
g. <<NamingScheme>> The specification of a Type whose members are names [Color
Name: Yellow, Color Codes: R255 G255 B0]
The following stereotyped relationships are used in the model:
a. <<typeInstance>> a relationship between a type and one of its instances
(UML:Dependency) [Color Name: Red, Color Codes: R255 G0 B0]
b. <<powertypeInstance>> a relationship between a type and its powerset
(UML:Dependency) [Color Name: Red, Color Codes: R255 G0 B0]
c. <<nameTypeInstance>> a relationship between a name and its NameType
(UML:Dependency) [Color Name: Red, Color Codes: R255 G0 B0]
d. <<super-subtype>> a relationship between a type and one of its subtypes
(UML:Generalisation) [Color Name: Blue, Color Codes: R0 G0 B255]
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
37
=== page 38 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical_1-2.html[3/3/2011 3:42:55 PM]
e. <<wholePart>> a relationship between an individual and one of its parts
(UML:Aggregation) [Color Name: Green, Color Codes: R0 G147 B0]
f. <<namedBy>> a relationship between a name and the thing it names [Color Name:
Black, Color Codes: R0 G0 B0]
g. <<tuple>>/<<couple> a relationship between a things (UML:n-ary relationship
diamond) [Color Name: Grey(80%), Color Codes: R40 G40 B40]
Some examples are depicted in the figure below:
(click to enlarge)
 
The naming
 convention for classes, attributes, and association names is camel case as
follows:
a. Class names start with uppercase.
b. Attributes and association names start with lowercase.
c. Acronyms are all uppercase. Acronyms in the middle of a name are avoided
because of the concatenation of the acronym uppercase and the succeeding
string leading uppercase.
Note that the size of the icons is not indicative of their importance; the sizes are adjusted to
reduce line crossings and bends to make the diagrams easier to understand.
Note: In some
 instances the data model figures may be hard to read in a hardcopy printout
but a version at full-resolution which can be zoomed in is published in the online DoDAF v2.0
Meta-Model Data Dictionary.  Definitions for
 the model terms are contained in the DoDAF v2.0
meta-model data dictionary (download links cited in section 1). This includes
 a summary of
aliases, composite term definitions, authoritative source definitions, and rationale.  Note that
foundational
 classes are generally not shown on data group diagrams; this foundational
material is found in the ideas foundation ontology tab. This includes super-subtype, whole-
 
 
38
=== page 39 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical_1-2.html[3/3/2011 3:42:55 PM]
part, temporal-whole-part, overlap, type-instance (member-of), and before-after patterns.
Also not shown are the data structures for classification marking of architecture information
at the whole and element (portion) levels using the Intelligence Community - Intelligence
Standard Markings (IC-ISM). The schema for the IC-ISM is in physical exchange
specification (PES) tab. Lastly, note
 that the size of the icons is not indicative of their
importance; sizes are adjusted to reduce line crossings and bends to make the diagrams
easier to understand.
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
39
=== page 40 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical_1-3.html[3/3/2011 3:42:58 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
How to Use the DODAF Meta Model (DM2)
Presentation Types for DM2 Data
Within the DoDAF Meta-model, the elements in the DoDAF Models (Views) are represented
with time periods (temporal extents). Temporal extent can connote the future, thus allowing
the models to represent “To-Be” capabilities and processes or the “before-after” aspects of
the activities. Generally, DoDAF views, models and supporting data are represented in the
following general forms:
Structural Models comprised of diagrams describing the structural or static aspects of
architecture.
Behavioral Models comprised of diagrams describing the behavioral or dynamic
aspects of architecture.
Tree Models-A type of structural model which can represent DoDAF elements in a
taxonomic form.. These can represent “whole-part”, “super-subtype relationships or
other relationships. These models are particularly important in maintaining traceability
thru the various level of detail in representing the design or architecture. A Work
Breakdown Structure (WBS) is an example of a model including both activities and/or
performers in a decomposition tree.
Mapping: Views that provide matrix (or similar) mappings between two different types
of information. This used to represent such things as functional and data allocations
and traceability.
Tabular: Views which present data arranged in rows and columns, which generally
amplify or have a direct relationship to the behavioral, structural (including
ontological) models.
Pictorial: Views such as free-form pictures.
Timeline: Model comprised of diagrams usually describing the programmatic aspects
of architecture ((E.g. Gant Chart). This is generally related directly to the WBS
taxonomic model. These can also represent time in efficiency analysis of the activities
in a process (e.g. LSS analysis).
 
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
40
=== page 41 ===
DoDAF Meta-Model Logical Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/logical_1-3.html[3/3/2011 3:42:58 PM]
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
41
=== page 42 ===
DM2 - Performers
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/performers.html[3/3/2011 3:43:02 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Performers
Performer is a class of entities that are central to the description of architecture. It is the
Who in the Architectural Development Process. The How, tasks, activities, and processes
(composite of activities), are assigned to Performers to accomplish the desired outcome.
Performers are further subdivided and allocated to organizations, personnel and
mechanization. Rules, locations and measures are then applied to organizations, personnel
and mechanization. Within this assignment and allocation process there are many major
tradeoff opportunities. Automation (mechanization versus people) tradeoffs, analysis for
items such as performance and cost/benefit are involved in the process. When these
tradeoffs and associated decisions are sufficiently mature, an allocated baseline can be
declared and initial work breakdown structures refined.
Data Group Descriptions
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising Performers, is shown in the figure below.
a. The first thing to note about Performer is that it can represent:
1. A Person Type such as described by the Amy’s Military Occupational Specialties
(MOS). MOS describe Skills and their measurement (not shown in this
diagram).  Includes 
Materiel assigned and necessary for the performance of
activities, e.g., as per Army CTA-50.  Note 
that Person Types have temporal
whole-parts (states) such as in-garrison or deployed that may have different
Materiel compositions and other associations such as applicable Rules.
2. An Organization (type or actual Individual Organization) meaning a mission
chartered organization, not limited to just collections of people or locations,
e.g., the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has a chartered mission and it
chooses the locations, people, etc., to accomplish such.
3. A System in the general sense of an assemblage of components – machine,
human – that accomplish a function, i.e., anything from small pieces of
equipment to FoS and SoS. Note that Systems are made up of Materiel (e.g.,
equipment, aircraft, and vessels) and Personnel Types, and organizational
elements.
4. A Service, from a software service to a business service such as Search and
Rescue.
5. Any combination of the above.
b. The performance of an Activity by a Performer occurs in physical space and time. That
is, at some place and time, the Activity is conducted. This is referred to as a spatial-
temporal overlap, simply meaning that the Activity and Performer overlap in space
and time. There are two ways in which a Performer spatial-temporally overlaps an
Activity:
1. In the act of performing the Activity. This relationship is sometimes called
assigned to for the purposes of traceability.
2. The other way is as part of a larger process (aggregated Activity). This is
sometimes called allocated to and forms the initial stages of system or process
decomposition. Allocated Performer elements (parts of Performers) are assigned
Activities (or processes, tasks) in the initial stages of Performer definition.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
42
=== page 43 ===
DM2 - Performers
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/performers.html[3/3/2011 3:43:02 PM]
c. A standard (Rule) constrains an Activity in general. Some of those constraints might
also apply to the performance of the Activity by a Performer.
d. A Performer may have Measures associated with the performance of an Activity (e.g.,
target tracking accuracy.) It may also have Measures associated with the Performer
overall (e.g., operational condition.)
e. Performers perform at Locations that can be specific positions or areas, regions, or
installations, sites, or facilities. Location type requirements/capabilities of a Performer
are captured/expressed via the Activities that are performed under certain Conditions
(e.g., must be able to perform Maneuver under Desert Conditions.)
f. Activities performed by a System can be called system or service functions (i.e.,
activities and/or processes performed by a system). System or service functions
(activities) are allocated to hardware, software, firmware or personnel (when the
person is considered integral to the system).
g. In typical uses, the Activities are represented by verbs and Performers are
represented by nouns. This distinguishes the how from the who. In a typical
specification process allocation to performers can take place at varying levels of detail
depending on the design maturity or the intended degree of design constraint.
h. Performers are represented in many places and stages in the detailed architecture. It
should be noted that a pure Requirements Architectural Description may not show
allocations or performer. This may be left to later stages of the design process.
Further, not all architecture modeling standards explicitly provide for allocation. For
example, the Systems Modeling Language (SysML) extensions to the UML modeling
standard have added this feature.
DoDAF Meta Model for Performers
(Click to enlarge)
 
43
=== page 44 ===
DM2 - Performers
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/performers.html[3/3/2011 3:43:02 PM]
Usage in Core Processes
Data for Performer are used in the following ways:
JCIDS:
1. Person Type processes are typically termed Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (TTP)
in DoD. Procedures are allocated sets of activities and/or processes, where Tactics and
Techniques, typically, are made up of the procedures as influenced by rules, doctrine,
paradigms, etc. acquired through skill development during the education and training
process.
2. A pure Requirements Architectural Description may not show allocations or performer.
This may be left to later stages of the design process.
PPBE:
1. Programs of Record (PoR) are Projects that can contain both material and non-
material Performers (See FYDP Program Structure Handbook (DoD 7045.7-H).
2. Program of Record are linked to the PPBE through the Work Breakdown Structure
(WBS) (see DAS) depicting Performers related to cost.
3. The Planning and Programming*[1]  process typically
 conducts analysis through the
evaluation of Capabilities, Performers and the attributes associated with Performers
(e.g. Measures). (e.g. "Gap and Overlap analysis", Capability evolution, etc.).
DAS:
1. MIL-HDBK-881A*[2] and DoD 5000.1, in providing fundamental guidance for
specifications, WBS, Statement of Works (SOWs) of the DAS, all require the
identification of the Performers and their component parts and types as fundamental
elements.
2. The acquisition process generally involves Performers either through the material
acquisition of systems or the acquisition of processes associated with performers.
3. The acquisition process can also involve the Acquisition of Services.
SE:
1. Activities are assigned to Performers (organizational, human, materiel, or some
combination thereof). Capabilities or lower-level derived capabilities,
measures,conditions, constraints and other expressions of requirements are assigned
to the various levels of Performer reification. Allocation occurs from level-to-level as
part of structural design decomposition or design refinement.
2. Allocation is the term used by architects and engineers to denote the organized cross-
association (mapping) of elements within the various structures or hierarchies of a
user view regardless of modeling convention or standard. The concept of allocation
requires flexibility suitable for abstract system specification, rather than a particular
constrained method of system or software design. System modelers often associate
various elements in abstract, preliminary, and sometimes tentative ways. Allocations
can be used early in the design as a precursor to more detailed rigorous specifications
and implementations. As the requirements definition stage gives way to the design
stage and actual components become visible, it becomes important to distinguish
between allocated to and assigned to.
3. Some types of performers under configuration control called system Configuration
Items (CIs). Software Configuration items are termed Computer Software
Configuration Items (CSCIs) or Software Configuration items (SCIs) in MIL-HDBK-
881A. Hardware Configuration items may follow the Mil-STD-196E taxonomy (Central,
Center, System, Subsystem, Set, Group, Unit.) MIL-HDBK-881A , which guides DoD
44
=== page 45 ===
DM2 - Performers
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/performers.html[3/3/2011 3:43:02 PM]
Work Breakdown Structures (WBS), defines software only by levels (e.g., 1, 2, 3, etc.)
Ops Planning:
1. Determines who is going to accomplish the required tasks (activities), where, under
what conditions, and to what measures
CPM:
1. Performers are the major items in the portfolio to be managed and optimized
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
45
=== page 46 ===
DM2 - Resource Flows
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/resource_flows.html[3/3/2011 3:43:08 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
Resource Flows
Resource Flows are used to model the flow of Resources - Materiel, Information (and Data),
Geo-Spatial Extents, Performers, or any combination thereof. Resource Flows are key
modeling techniques used in the definition of Interfaces and assurance of Interoperability
between Activities and their associated Performers (e.g., Systems and Personnel.) Resource
Flow models and associated analysis techniques reveal behavior such as:
The connectivity between resources.  
Resource Flow modeling provides an explicit means to describe the behavior of
activities, systems, organizations and their composite effects on the overall enterprise.
The content of the information flowing between resources (e.g., interface definition).
The order or sequential behavior (parallel or serial) of the resources in relation to one
another (e.g., project task execution and critical path).  
The behavior of Resource Flow between or within organizations (e.g., work flow,
information flow, etc.).
The changes in state during the spatial and/or temporal existence of the resource.
The rules that modify the behavior of the Resource Flow (e.g., business rules,
controls, decisions, etc.).
The measures that define the quality, constraints, timing, etc. of the Resource Flow
(e.g., Quality of Service (QoS), measures of performance, measures of effectiveness,
etc.).
The flow of control orchestrating the behavior of the Resource Flow.
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising Resource Flows is shown in the figure below.
The following should be noted:
a. Whereas prior versions of DoDAF modeled only information and data exchanges and
flows, this version also allows modeling of other flows, such as:
1. Materiel flows such as ammunition, fuel, etc. important for modeling the fire
rate, logistics, etc., aspects of a Capability solution so it can be compared with
other alternative solutions.
2. Personnel Types such as Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) that allow
representation of the Training and Education pipeline aspects of Doctrine,
Organization, Training, Material, Leadership and Education, Personnel, and
Facilities (DOTMLPF).
3. Performers such as Services, Systems, or Organizations that might be the
output or result of a Project’s design and production process (activities). This
allows modeling of, for instance, an acquisition project.
b. Another difference from prior versions of DoDAF is that all exchanges and flows are by
virtue of a producing or consuming Activity. Resource Flows are Activity-based, not
Performer based since a Performer cannot produce or consume a resource other than
by conduct of a production or consumption activity. That is, a Performer can only
provide or consume by conducting an activity of production or consumption. For
instance, publication and subscription are modeled as an interaction between the
publishing Activity, the subscribing Activity, and the information or data Resource.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
46
=== page 47 ===
DM2 - Resource Flows
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/resource_flows.html[3/3/2011 3:43:08 PM]
Note that publication is typically not at the same time as subscription but the
subscriber does have to go to the publication place to retrieve the Resource. For
example, data might be published at 2:00 GMT on a server located at some URL and
the subscriber may not overlap until 10:00 GMT. Also note in the diagram the overlap
is a triple - the producing Activity, the Consuming Activity, and the Resource.
c. The exchange or flow triple may have standards (Rules) associated with it such as
Information Assurance (IA)/Security rules or, for data publication or subscription, data
COI and web services standards.
d. Rules and Measures are applied to specific Activities and their Performers. Activities,
Systems and Personnel can be assigned to Locations and further can be assigned
Conditions and Constraints.
e. The term flow implies that something (e.g., materiel, information) is moving from
point A to point B, hence the use of the foundation concept of "overlap".
f. The exchange or flow triple may have Measures associated with it such as timeliness,
throughput, reliability, or QoS.
g. Resource Flow modeling can be performed at varying levels of detail and fidelity
depending on the areas of concern being analyzed and the solutions being sought. The
upper-level aggregations have been termed need lines in previous versions DoDAF.
Other terminology expressing levels of aggregation are used depending on the
community of interest (e.g., The SysML modeling standard uses lifeline).
h. It should be noted that information inputs and outputs between resources for some
levels of decomposition may be at a higher-level of abstraction than the information
characteristics represented in the matrix. This is commonly done to simplify graphical
representations of information flow or in the initial definition stages where the
characteristics are still unknown. In this case, multiple information exchanges will map
to a single resource input or output. Similarly, the information inputs and outputs
between resources at a low-level of decomposition may be at a higher-level of detail
than the information exchanges in the matrix, and multiple information inputs and
outputs may map to a single information exchange. In these cases, to provide the
necessary clarity and precision, an ontological or taxonomic structure of information
aggregation should be developed for use in each level of decomposition of the
Resource Flow models (e.g., The Navy Common Information Exchange List [CIEL]
represents initiatives showing taxonomic structure or levels of aggregation).
 
 
47
=== page 48 ===
DM2 - Resource Flows
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/resource_flows.html[3/3/2011 3:43:08 PM]
DoDAF Meta Model for Resource Flow
(Click to enlarge)
 
Usage in
 Core Processes
Resource Flow modeling is a fundamental engineering based technique used in Information
Technology (IT) Architecture, System Engineering, Process Re-engineering, Resource
Planning and many other disciplines.
a. JCIDS
1. Where are the process bottlenecks?
2. Are the activities and procedures interoperable?
3. Identify new and emerging systems interoperability requirements.
4. Uncover unnecessary or inefficient operational activities and information flows.
5. Evaluate alternative architectures with different connectivity and Resource Flow
to maximize capability and minimize automation complexity.
6. Identify critical connectivity needs and interfaces (or Key Interface Profiles
(KIPs) between activities and their performers (organizations and personnel
types).
7. Critical Interfaces are generally documented in formal interface documentation
signed by the responsible authorities (both information supplier and information
consumer) in charge of each end of the interface. This type of interface may be
annotated as a Key Interface (KI). A KI is defined as an interface where one or
more of the following criteria are met:
8. Support Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) and other Systems Engineering Analysis.
b. DAS
1. The interface spans organizational boundaries (may be across instances of the
same system, but utilized by different organizations).
2. Support the development of test sequences and procedures.
3. The Details of Resource Flow (materiel, personnel, or data) are generally
documented in Interface Control Documents (ICDs), Interface Requirements
Specifications (IRSs) and Interface Description Documents (IDDs). This data is
typically provided to DoD Investment Review Board (IRB) registry systems for
48
=== page 49 ===
DM2 - Resource Flows
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/resource_flows.html[3/3/2011 3:43:08 PM]
the purpose of milestone reviews and support of acquisition decisions points.
c. PPBE
1. Ensure FYDP provides flows needed for operations and missions
2. Ensure consumption requirements are met by producers
d. SE
1. Identify new system or service, functions (activities), components and
modifications required.
2. Identify new Resource Flow and system integration requirements.
3. Identification of the need for Application of new standards.
4. Clearly identify the relationship and information flow between systems and
system/services in an SoS or between services in a Service Oriented
Architecture (SOA) including definition of publish or subscribe requirements 
5. Interface Identification
 and Definition including interoperability analysis and
standardization. 
6. Support configuration
 management of interfaces. Interfaces are generally
documented in interface documentation representing the agreements of the
responsible parties in charge of each end of the interface (both information
supplier and information consumer). This, in no way implies a point-to-point
interface. Interfaces implemented with an enterprise service bus, for example,
are defined with appropriate publish/subscribe documentation formalized, if
necessary, with contractual agreements between information supplier and
consumer.
7. Critical interfaces are generally documented in formal interface documentation
signed by the responsible authorities (both information supplier and information
consumer) in charge of each end of the interface. For legacy point-to-point
interfaces this may be in the form of Interface Control Drawings (ICDs),
Interface Requirement Documents (IRSs), Interface Design Documents (IDDs),
etc. In multiple access or common connectivity (radio communications or bus
type connectivity) implementations may be in the form of formal agreements
(defined herein as a consent among parties regarding the terms and conditions
of activities that said parties participate in) detailing the specific set of
implementations (e.g., Tactical Digital Information Links [TADILs]) data
elements implementation tables or in the case of a SOA, a publish/subscribe
implementation document. These agreements are, in general, managed and
controlled by the SoS or System Project manager. In new systems, and where
possible the interface should be managed and configuration controlled using a
common precision data model. Figure 4 illustrates the evolution from
configuration control of legacy point-to-point interfaces to a net-centric,
distributed processing means of connectivity using carefully managed publish
and subscribe agreements and documentation based on formally documented
logical and physical data models.
49
=== page 50 ===
DM2 - Resource Flows
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/resource_flows.html[3/3/2011 3:43:08 PM]
Migrating from Legacy to Data Focused Configuration Management
(Click to enlarge)
e. Ops Planning
1. Operations utilizing information flows should be technology independent.
However, operations and their relationships may be influenced by new
technologies. There may be some cases in which it is necessary to document
the way activities are performed to examine ways in which new systems could
facilitate streamlining the activities
2. Mission Planning including simulation and training.
3. Logistics planning.
4. Provide a necessary foundation for depicting information needs and task
sequencing to assist in producing procedures, operational plans and facilitate
associated personnel training.
5. Identify critical mission threads and operational Resource Flow exchanges by
annotating which activities are critical (i.e., identify the activities in the DoDAF-
described Model that are critical e.g., Critical Path).
f. CPM
1. Resource flows can be used to represent the structural and behavioral
relationships between the Activities and Performers within the portfolio
including interfaces and interdependencies.
Presentation
Resource Flows are generally depicted as Structural, Behavioral and Tree models with
amplifying tabular information. A generic Resource Flow presentation is shown in the figure
below.
50
=== page 51 ===
DM2 - Resource Flows
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/resource_flows.html[3/3/2011 3:43:08 PM]
Migrating from Legacy to Data Focused Configuration Management
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
51
=== page 52 ===
DM2 - Information and Data
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/info_data.html[3/3/2011 3:43:12 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Information and Data
Information is the state of a something-of-interest that is materialized, in any medium or
form, and communicated or received. In DoDAF V1.0, this took the form of what was called
a logical data model which even in DoDAF V1.0 permitted a less structured and formalized
description than the computer science definition of a logical data model. In DoDAF V2.0, the
emphasis is on the identification and description of the information in a semantic form (what
it means) and why it is of interest (who uses it). Although this may entail some formality
such as describing relationships between concepts, its purpose is to convey the interests in
the operator, executive, or business person's frame of reference.
Data is the representation of information in a formalized manner suitable for communication,
interpretation, or processing by humans or by automatic means, and is concerned with the
encoding of information for repeatability, meaning, and proceduralized use. While
information descriptions are useful in understanding requirements, e.g., inter-federate
information sharing requirements or intra-federate representation strategies, data
descriptions are important in responsive implementations of those requirements and
assurances of interoperable data sharing within and between federates.
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model, for the data comprising Information and Data, is shown in the figure
below. 
Information and Data Model Diagram
(Click image to enlarge)
Items of note are as follows:
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
52
=== page 53 ===
DM2 - Information and Data
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/info_data.html[3/3/2011 3:43:12 PM]
a. The key concept in this model is that Information describes some Thing - material,
temporal, or even abstract, such as a relationship (Tuple) or set (Type).
b. Since Information is a Thing, Information can describe other Information, e.g.,
metadata.
c. A Name is a type of Information in that it describes a Thing. A Name may be short or
long - there is no restriction. So a textual description can be thought of a just a long
Name. Information is more general than text strings and could be structured,
formalized, or include other manners of description such as diagrams or images.
d. Information, as a Resource Type, inherits whole-part, super-subtype, and before-
after relationships.
e. If Information is processable by humans or machines in a repeatable way, it is called
proceduralized. Not all proceduralized information is necessarily computerized; forms
are examples of data proceduralized for human repeatable processing.
f. Data to be proceduralized has associations such as parts and types as well as other
application specific associations. So for an Entity-Relationship model, Attributes are
has associations with Entities and Entities are related according to verb phrases and
cardinalities. In the physical schema, the fields are associated to data types.
g. The representation for Data is not intended to cover all the details of, for instance, a
relational data base management system (DBMS) underlying Meta-model, but just
those aspects necessary to support the decision-making of the core processes.
h. Architectural Descriptions describes architectures. An Activity Model is an example of
an Architectural Description. Two subtypes of Architectural Description are called out -
the AV-1 and the Manifest - because of their importance in discovery and exchange,
respectively. Note that the AV-1 information can also be provided in a structured
manner, using the Project data group to describe the architecture project's goals,
timeline, activities, resources, productions, rules, measures, etc. In a typical
development project, the architecture descriptions will be at increasing levels of detail,
what John Zachman calls "levels of reification".
It should be noted that all methods, even the most philosophical and methodical, involve the
ingestion of some record of the enterprise's processes, legacy information-keeping systems,
and descriptions of what types of things it thinks it deals with. Upon collection of this raw
data, terms within it are then: 
a. Identified. This
 is done by noting recurring or key terms.
b. Understood. Definitions of terms are sought and researched. In most cases, there are
multiple authoritative definitions. Definitions selected should be appropriate for the
context of use of the term within the enterprise activities.
c. Collated and correlated. This is done by grouping seemingly similar or related terms.
d. Harmonized. In this step, aliases, near-aliases, and composite terms are identified. A
consensus definition is formulated from the authoritative source definitions. Often
super-subtype and whole-part relationships begin to emerge.
The next step is to relate the harmonized terms. Some of the relationships are implicit in the
definitions and these definitions may contribute to the relationship description. At this point,
the formality can vary. A formal ontological approach will type all relationships to
foundational concepts such as whole-part and super-subtype. However, there are many
metaphysical challenges with such an approach and it is not necessary for many
applications. This constitutes the conceptual-level of modeling, defined and related terms,
now considered concepts because the definitions and relationships lend a meaning to the
terms. The conceptual model should be understandable by anyone knowledgeable about the
enterprise. Super-subtype and whole-part relationships can provide cognitive economy.
Conceptual models can be done in Entity-Relationship or UML Class model style although any
format that documents definitions and relationships is functionally equivalent. Note that the
 
 
53
=== page 54 ===
DM2 - Information and Data
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/info_data.html[3/3/2011 3:43:12 PM]
subtype concept in UML generally results in the subclass inheriting properties from the
supertype while in Entity-Relationship (E-R) modeling only the identifying keys are inherited
directly; the other supertype properties are available after a join operation.
At the logical-level, relationships may have cardinalities or other rules added that indicate
how many of one instance of something relates to an instance of something else, the
necessity of such relations, and so on. The concepts may also be attributed, meaning they
will be said to have some other concept, e.g., the concept of eye has the concept of color.
Often at the logical-level, the relationships are reified or made concrete or explicit. At the
logical-level, this is done in case there is something additional that needs to be stated about
the relationship, e.g., the quantity of some part of something or the classification of the
related information, which may be different from the classification of the individual elements.
There may also be considerations of normalization, meaning that the database structure is
modified for general-purpose querying and is free of certain undesirable characteristics
during insertion, update, and deletion operations that could lead to a loss of data integrity.
The benefits of normalization are to uncover additional business rules that might have been
overlooked without the analytical rigor of normalization and ensure the precise capture of
business logic. The logical model, though having more parts than the conceptual model,
should still be understandable by enterprise experts. At the logical-level, some sort of
modeling style is normally used such as Entity-Relationship or UML Class modeling.
At the physical-level, the exact means by which the information is to be exchanged, stored,
and processed is determined. At this level, we are talking about data. The efficiency,
reliability, and assured repeatability of the data use are considered. The datatypes, the exact
format in which the data is stored are determined. The datatype needs to accommodate all
the data that is permissible to store or exchange yet be efficient and disallow formats that
are not permissible. The entities may be de-normalized for efficiency so that join operations
don't have to be performed. Logical associations may be replaced with identifiers (e.g., as
associative entities or foreign or migrated keys in Entity Relationship Diagrams [ERDs] or
explicit identifier attributes or association classes in class models). Keys, identifiers, and
other means of lookup are setup. Indexes, hashes, and other mechanisms may be setup to
allow data access in accordance with requirements. The physical target may be any of the
following:
a. Database – relational, object, or flat file.
b. Message exchange format – document (e.g., XML), binary (e.g., Interface Definition
Language (IDL)).
c. Cybernetic (human – machine), e.g., print or screen formats, such as forms.
Usage in Core Processes
Information and Data models are used in the following ways:
a. Commonality and Interoperability between Core processes
1. Information models materialize for enterprise participants what things are
important to the enterprise and how they are related.
2. Information models can serve as a basis for standardization of terminology and
concept inter-relationships for human, machine, and human-machine
communications.
3. Information models can provide cognitive compactness for an enterprise's
personnel through the use of taxonomies and other relationship structures. This can
improve clarity, efficiency, accuracy, and interoperability of action within the
enterprise.
4. Information models document the scope of things the enterprise is concerned with
in a form that allows comparison with other communities of interest to reveal common
interests.
5. COI coordination and harmonization.
6. Authoritative sources identification and management.
b. JCIDS and PPBE
54
=== page 55 ===
DM2 - Information and Data
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/info_data.html[3/3/2011 3:43:12 PM]
1) Data and information models can be used to determine if a proposed capability will
interoperate, be redundant with, or fill gaps in conjunction with other capabilities.
c. SE and DAS
1) Data models can be used to generate persistent storage of information such as in
databases. 
2) Data models can be used to generate formats for exchanging data between
machines, humans, and machine-to-human. For example, an XSD is a physical data
model that is generally an exchange format. Web services can be used with relational
DBMS' to generate XML for exchange in the format of the data model implemented in
the DBMS. The underlying data models (the physical data model and the exchange
data format) do not have to be the same; a translator or mediator may be invoked to
translate during the exchange. 
3) Data models can be used to compare whether Performers are compatible for data
exchange.  
4) Interdependent
 data or information needs. 
5) Data and information models can be used during milestone reviews to verify
interoperability, non-redundancy, and sufficiency of the solution. 
6) Information models are useful in initial discovery of a service, to know what sorts
of information it may provide access to or its accessed capabilities need. An
information model is part of a service description. 
7) Data models are useful in knowing how to interact with a service and the
capabilities it provides and for establishing the service contract. A data model is part
of a service description and service contract. 
8) Database/sources consolidation and migration. 
9) Standards definition and establishment. 
10) Mediation and cross-COI sharing.
d. OPS Planning
e. CPM 
1) Data and information models can be used to determine if components of a portfolio
have:  
2) Overlapping
 data or information production (an indication of potential unwanted
redundancy). 
3) Data assets management.
Presentation
Presentation of Information and Data are depicted using all the forms shown in 1.3 and
manifest themselves in the presentation of many of the other Data Groups.  Modeling
information and
 data have well established techniques and styles.  Techniques for
constructing
 and presenting models of Information and Data vary. They are taught in
academic and vocational curricula. There is considerable literature, such as books,
professional journals, conference proceedings, and professional magazines, on best practices,
experiences, and theory. The figure below illustrates some of the basic methods for model
creation.
Examples of the Ways Information and Data Models are Constructed
 
55
=== page 56 ===
DM2 - Information and Data
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/info_data.html[3/3/2011 3:43:12 PM]
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
56
=== page 57 ===
DM2 - Rules
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/rules.html[3/3/2011 3:43:16 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 - DoDAF Meta-Model
Rules
Rules are prescriptive sets of procedures regarding the execution of activities within an
enterprise. Rules exist within the enterprise whether or not they are ever written down,
talked about, or even part of an organization's consciousness. However, it is fairly common
practice for organizations to gather rules in a formal manner for specific purposes.
Business rules are a type of Rule that govern actions and are initially discovered as part of a
formal requirement-gathering process during the initial stages of a Project or during activity
analysis, or event analysis. In this case, the collecting of the business rules is coincidental to
the larger discovery process of determining the workflow of a process. Projects such as the
launching of a new system or service that supports a new or changed business operation
might lead to a new body of business rules for an organization that would require employees
to conceptualize the purpose of the organization in a new way. This practice of coincidental
business rule gathering is vulnerable to the creation of inconsistent or even conflicting
business rules within different organizational units, or within the same organizational unit
over time.
The DoDAF Meta Model provides a set of clear, concise data about rules that facilitates the
creation of rules and enables the sharing of those rules with others requiring similar
information.
A rule is not a process - the two, while related, are very different. A process is a
transformation that produces new things (outputs) from existing things (inputs), while a rule
prescribes the exact procedures to be used to ensure that the output is as to be expected in
each instance that the process is executed.  
Data Group
 Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising Rules is shown in the figure below.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
57
=== page 58 ===
DM2 - Rules
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/rules.html[3/3/2011 3:43:16 PM]
DoDAF Meta Model for Rules
(Click image to enlarge)
 
The following
 should be noted about the Rules Data Group:
a. A Rule constrains Activities. For example, a speed limit rule constrains driving activity.
Some seemingly static rules have the effect of limiting possible activities. For
example, a rule that security fences must be 10 feet high constrains the activity of
building security fences. This constraint may apply or vary under certain conditions.
For example, speed limits can be lower in poor weather conditions.  
b. Security classification,
 security marking, releasability, etc. are types of Guidance.
Similarly; a Rule is a stronger form of Guidance.
c. An important Constraint type is a Service Policy that constrains access to capability
Performers.
d. Doctrine, by definition, constrains military action.
Usage in Core Processes
Rules data are used to create, document, and share rules of all types that support
operational activities and/or the execution of capabilities in operational processes (composite
activities). These data can include:
a. Processes that define transactions where data must be exchanged or passed to
execute a specified activity, such as PPBE, CPM, JCIDS, or DAS.
b. Rules that define methods of accessing information or services within the net-centric
 
58
=== page 59 ===
DM2 - Rules
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/rules.html[3/3/2011 3:43:16 PM]
environment, such as Ops, PPBE, CPM, or JCIDS.
c. The order of steps that occur in a series of actions that must be performed in a
specific order, such as DAS, SE, PPBE, or CPM.
d. Rules defining analysis of options or future actions, such as Ops Planning, JCIDS, PPBE
or CPM.
Data for Rules are used in the six core processes in the following ways:
a. JCIDS:
1) For Materiel Facility, Installation, and Site trade-offs as part of DOTMLPF analyses
2) For detailing Interoperability requirements. 
3) In constraining requirements dealing with material and non-material solutions.
4) In relating Doctrine and TT&P to material and non-material solutions.
b. PPBE: 
1) In the Planning and Programming process many rules are applied to cost-benefit
tradeoffs, cost estimation, program structure, and program constraints.
c. DAS: 
1) In both technical and programmatic aspects of the DAS. 
2) In specification, standards, directives and guidelines.
d. SE:
1) In the architectural descriptions of systems describing both structure and behavior.
2) In standards applied throughout the design and development process.
e. Ops Planning: 
1) Rules are the basic elements contained in Doctrine, TT&P and training publications.
Rules are used throughout the development and architectural descriptions of
Operational processes.
f. CPM:
1) In describing and governing both the programmatic and technical aspects of the
portfolio.
2) In describing the standards and constraints applicable to the portfolio.
Presentation
Rules can be represented in many ways. Typically behavioral
 and tree structures as well as
various logic mapping techniques can be used to depict rules, their relationships and
interactions. Conflicting rules
 can be identified using many well know logic analysis
instruments and techniques.
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
59
=== page 60 ===
DM2 - Goals
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/goals.html[3/3/2011 3:43:20 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Group
Goals
Goals data are defined to represent the desired effect, ends, visions, outcomes, objectives,
etc. for which operational processes, projects, or special programs are conducted. Goals are
used to help guide the Organizations to ensure that everyday operations are aligned to a
strategic direction. A goal is an end toward which long-term, ongoing effort is directed. In
general, goals are established to provide a description of the intended future state. They are
established to provide a target to aim toward, whereby activity is focused on attaining the
desired effect (goal). Goals provide participants in activities a sense of direction, and a view
of what to expect as activity progresses toward some end point. A Goal (and its aliases)
describe a desired state of a Resource (Materiel, Information, Performer, or Geopolitical
Extent.) Goals data can be expressed as enterprise goals-high-level strategic goals that
apply to the entire organization-or as more specific operational goals that define desired
outcomes of the work process.
Data Group Description
The following should be noted about the Goals Data Group:
a. Although the language sounds different, the meaning of a desired effect (a change in
state of some object) is the same as the meaning of goal.
b. A desired change in the state of some object leads to activities constrained by Rules
that are performed by Performers. Some Activities are considered Events because
they are of near-zero duration with respect to the frame of discernment of the Vision,
Performers, etc.
c. Within DoDAF, goals are identified and described to provide direction to Activities and
to orient those Activities toward a desired effect. When a Performer executes an
Activity, the Performer does so within the limitations prescribed for the Activity
(Rules) and aims toward a desired effect. That effect should either meet, or contribute
to meeting, established Goals that reflect the vision of the organization.
Usage in Core Processes
Goals are established at all levels of the organization and each of the core DoD processes.
Goals can be applied to the Enterprise or Solution architecture effort. Goals are particularly
useful to teams undertaking an architecture development effort to evaluate the success of
the effort and how the effort contributes to achieving higher level goals, mission
requirements, capability developments, or development of Services and Systems to support
Department or organizational business operations.
Data for Goals are useful for:
a. Scoping an activity to ensure that resources utilized in executing an activity contribute
to the overall goals and vision of the organization.
b. Establishing rules under which activities are executed to create boundaries for
efficiency and effectiveness (Constraints) and establishing those circumstances under
which an activity is executed (Event).
c. Establishing measures to determine the success of an activity, consistent with an
established goal.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
60
=== page 61 ===
DM2 - Goals
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/goals.html[3/3/2011 3:43:20 PM]
Data for Projects can be used in the six core processes in the following ways:
a. JCIDS: In establishing desired and threshold capabilities. Traceability should always be
maintained between Goals and capabilities. This should include measures, rules and
pedigree.
b. PPBE, DAS, SE: Goals are established at all level of the design, development and
acquisition process. Traceability throughout the various levels is essential to the
proper management an control of cost, systems engineering and acquisition.
c. Ops Planning: In establishing Operational Plans Goals and objectives are established
related to Missions. Goals can be described as both strategic and tactical.
d. CPM: In establishing both the technical and programmatic aspects of the portfolio.
Presentation
Goals are typically depicted in tabular or textual form. It is desirable that Goals be presented
in a structured manner showing primary and derived goals. This enhances project
traceability.
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
 
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
61
=== page 62 ===
DM2 - Capability
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/capability_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:27 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Capability
The Capability Data Group provides information on the collection and integration of activities
that combine to respond to a specific requirement. A capability, as defined here is "the
ability to achieve a desired effect under specified standards and conditions through
combinations of means and ways to perform a set of tasks." This definition is consistent with
that contained in the JCIDS Instruction published by the Joint Staff.
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising Capability is shown in the figure below. Items
of note:
a. Ways and means are interpreted in DM2 language to be Resources and Activities
b. Because a Desired Effect is a desired state of a Resource (see Goals data group), a
Capability is about states (persistence of current ones, or changes to future ones) of
Resources. 
c. Capabilities link
 to Measures (Metrics) through the Activities they entail and the
Desired Effects sought.
d. Capabilities relate to Services via the realization of the Capability by a Performer that
is a Service. In general, a Service would not provide the Desired Effect(s) but, rather,
access to ways and means (Activities and Resources) that would.
DoDAF Meta Model for Capability
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
62
=== page 63 ===
DM2 - Capability
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/capability_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:27 PM]
(Click image to enlarge)
Usage in Core Processes
Data for Capabilities are used to describe the capability; define acquisition and development
requirements necessary to provide the required capability; facilitate understanding of
capability execution; develop/update/improve doctrine and educational materials in support
of capability execution; and to facilitate sharing and reuse of data.
The Capabilities Data Group (CDG) has a representation at varying levels, from enterprise
level to solutions and applies to all DoD core processes.  This includes
 enterprise goals
associated with the overall vision, that provide a strategic context for the capabilities
described by an architecture, and an accompanying high-level scope, more general than the
scenario-based scope defined in an operational concept diagram. At this level, the CDG
enables a high-level description of capabilities in decision-makers contexts that can be used
for communicating a strategic vision regarding capability evolution. Factors considered
 in a
Capability Based Analysis are:
a. Doctrine
b. Organizations
c. Training
d. Materiel
e. Leadership and Education
f. Personnel
g. Facilities
The following sections document how the Capability Data Group and DM2 support analysis of
each of these factors.
In Joint Pub 1-02, Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, doctrine is defined as
"Fundamental principles by which the military forces or elements thereof guide their actions
in support of national objectives. It is authoritative but requires judgment in application."
The concept of judgment required in application deals with decision making and cannot be
precisely modeled except perhaps as rules affecting the applicability of other rules. The parts
of doctrine that can be modeled are included in the capability data group as follows:
a. Principles are modeled as Rules.
b. Military forces and elements thereof are modeled as types and assemblies of
Performers.
c. Actions are modeled as Activities.
Thus, doctrine is contained in the specification of certain fundamental Rules, Activities, and
Performers and the relationships among them. These relationships are:
a. Each Performer must be of one or more Activities.
b. Each Activity must be by one or more Performers.
c. Each Rule may be a constraint on one or more Activities.
d. Each Activity may be constrained by one or more Rules.
e. Each Rule may be a constraint on one or more Performers.
f. Each Performer may be constrained by one or more Rules.
Thus, since the DM2 contains the entities and relationships listed above it contains the
necessary and sufficient set of entities and relationships to permit the modeling of doctrine
 
 
63
=== page 64 ===
DM2 - Capability
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/capability_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:27 PM]
and a separate data group for Doctrine is not required.
Organization. An organization
 is a specific real-world assemblage of people and other
resources organized for an ongoing purpose. DM2 models Organizations as a type of
Performer.
Defining an Organization as an assemblage means that each Organization exhibits a
whole/part relationship whereby each Organization may be an assembly of other
Organizations and each Organization may also be a component of one or more other
Organizations. The following DM2 relationships are involved in the capability based analysis
of Organization where each Organization is a type of Performer:
a. Each Capability must be the result of one or more Activities.
b. Each Activity must be by one or more Performers, where each Performer
must be a type of Organization, therefore, each Capability must be provided by
one or more Organizations.
c. Each Organization must be the Performer of one or more Activities.
d. Each Rule may be a constraint on one or more Organizations.
e. Each Organization may be constrained by one or more Rules.
f. Each Rule may be a constraint on one or more Activities.
g. Each Activity may be constrained by one or more Rules.
Training is defined as an activity or set of Activities to increase the capacity of one or more
performers to perform one or more tasks under specified conditions to specific standards:
a. Each Performer may be either an Organization or a Person.
b. Each Performer must be of one or more Activities.
c. Each Activity must be performed under one or more Conditions.
d. Each Activity must be completed to meet one or more Standards.
e. Each Standard must be specified by one or more Measures.
Materiel is a type of Resource. Like Organization above, each Materiel exhibits a whole/part
relationship whereby each Materiel may be an assembly of other Materiels and each Materiel
may also be a component of one or more other Materiels.
The following DM2 relationships are involved in the capability based analysis of materiel
where each Materiel is a part of a Performer:
a. Each Performer must be assigned to one or more Organizations.
b. Each Performer must be used by one or more Persons, where each Person
must be the member of only one Organization at any one time.
c. Each Capability must be the result of one or more Activities.
d. Each Activity must be by one or more Performers, where each Performer
must be either an Organization or a Person using a Performer.
e. Each Performer must be the Performer of one or more Activities.
f. Each Rule may be a constraint on one or more Performers.
g. Each Performer may be constrained by one or more Rules.
h. Each Rule may be a constraint on one or more Activities.
i. Each Activity may be constrained by one or more Rules
Leadership and Education. Joint Pub 1-02 does not define leadership. In the context of
64
=== page 65 ===
DM2 - Capability
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/capability_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:27 PM]
the DM2, leadership is defined as the ability to lead. Joint Pub 1-02 defines Military
Education as the systematic instruction of individuals in subjects that will enhance their
knowledge of the science and art of war. Thus, to a certain extent, leadership is a set of
skills that can be taught as part of the science and art of war and a smaller set of skills that
can be trained as Activities that must be performed under specified conditions to meet
specified standards.
Leadership is about the judgment required in application of doctrine; it deals with decision
making and cannot be precisely modeled except perhaps as rules affecting the applicability
of other rules.
Personnel. Personnel refer to Persons. Each Person is a type of Performer.
The following DM2 relationships are involved in the capability based analysis of materiel
where each Person is a type of Performer:
a. Each Person must be assigned to only one Organization at any one time.
b. Each Person may the user of one or more Materiels.
c. Each Materiel must be used by one or more Persons.
d. Each Capability must be the result of one or more Activities.
e. Each Activity must be by one or more Performers, where each Performer
must be either an Organization or a Person using a Materiel.
f. Each Person must be the Performer of one or more Activities.
g. Each Rule may be a constraint on one or more Persons.
h. Each Person may be constrained by one or more Rules.
i. Each Rule may be a constraint on one or more Persons.
j. Each Activity may be constrained by one or more Rules.
Facilities. A Facility is defined as a real property entity consisting of underlying land and
one or more of the following: a building, a structure (including linear structures), a utility
system, or pavement. Please note that this definition requires that facilities be firmly sited on
or beneath the surface of the earth. Things like tents, aircraft, and satellites that are not
affixed to a single location on or beneath the surface of the earth are a type of Materiel.
Materiel are germane to capability-based analysis through the following relationships:
a. Each Facility may be the site of one or more Performers and any Materiel
that is part-of the Performer(s).
b. Each Performer may be at only one Facility or within a Materiel enclosure at
any one time.
c. Because a Facility is an Individual, it has a spatial and temporal extent.
An Individual instance of Materiel has a spatial and temporal extent in contrast to a Type
which does not. Generally Architectural Descriptions deal with Types of Materiel, not specific
Individuals, e.g., not specific serial-numbered items of equipment. However, the DM2 does
represent a Performer at a Location and, consequently, any Materiel that is part of the
Performer would also be at the Location.
Presentation
Capabilities are typically depicted in tabular or textual form. In some
 cases a pictorial is used
to help clarify the Capability. It is
 desirable that Capabilities be presented in a structured
manner showing primary and derived capabilities. Capabilities should
 be presented in a
manner depicting traceability to both Activities and Goals.
65
=== page 66 ===
DM2 - Capability
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/capability_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:27 PM]
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
66
=== page 67 ===
DM2 - Services
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:32 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Services
A Service, in its broadest sense, is a well-defined way to provide a unit of work, through
which a provider provides a useful result to a consumer. Services do not necessarily equate
to web-based technology or functions, although their use in the net-centric environment
generally involves the use of web-based, or network-based, resources.
Functionally, a Service is a set of strictly delineated functionalities, restricted to answering
the what-question, independent of construction or implementation issues *. Services form a
layer, decoupling operational activities from organizational arrangements of resources, such
as people and information systems. Finally, Services form a pool that can be orchestrated in
support of operational activities, and the operational activities define the level of quality at
which the Services are offered.
The Services Data Group provides those data that support the definition and use of Services
within the net-centric environment. Section 2.7.1 identifies and describes the data within the
group; Section 2.7.2 provides an example method for collecting data on services; Section
2.7.3 provides illustrative uses of the data, and Section 2.7.4 provides presentation
examples for using the Services-related data for presentation to/for management in
decision-making.
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising services is shown in the figure below. Note
the following guidance:
a. Services are activities done by a Service provider (Performer) to achieve desired
results for a Service consumer (other Performer). A Service is a type of Performer
which means that it executes an activity and provides a capability.
b. Capabilities and Services are related in two ways. One, the realization or
implementation of a Capability by a Performer (usually a configuration of Performers,
including Locations) may include within the configuration Services (or Service
compositions) to access other Performers within the overall Performer configuration.
Conversely, the realization or implementation of a Capability by a Performer
(configuration, including Location) may provide the Performers that are accessed by a
Service (or Service composition).
c. Unlike DoDAF V1.5, Services in DoDAF V2.0 include business services, such as Search
and Rescue. This is important to keep in mind because much of the SOA literature is
IT-oriented.
d. Although, in principle, anything has a description, the importance of self-description
for discovery and use of Services merits its call-out as a class. Further, because only
a public-facing side is described, the Service description needs to represent that it
describes the Service Port, not the entire Service. A Service Port is a special type of
Port that is self-describing and visible. The Service Description of the Service Port is
of all aspects necessary to utilize the Service and no more. As such, it may include
visible functionality, QoS, interface descriptions, data descriptions, references to
Standards or other Rules (Service Policy), etc. The inner workings of the Service are
not described in a Service Description.
e. Since Service inherits whole-part, temporal whole-part (and with it before-after),
Service may refer to an orchestrated or choreographed Service, as well as individual
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
67
=== page 68 ===
DM2 - Services
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:32 PM]
Service components.
f. Since Service Ports are types of Ports and Ports are types of Performers, they inherit
all of Performer's properties, including Measures associated with the Performer,
performance of Activities (Service Functions) with associated Measures, and provision
of objects (Materiel, Data, Information, Performers, Geopolitical Extents).
g. Any Performer that consumes a Service may have a Service Port that is described in
the service request. This description indicates how the Service provider should provide
or respond back to the Service consumer. That is, Service Ports are parts of
Performers that may or may not be Services themselves.
DoDAF Meta Model for Services
(Click image to enlarge)
Usage in Core Processes
The Services Data Group captures service requirements for capabilities, performers and
operational activities supporting all the core processes. The DM2 data elements describing
Services are linkable to architecture artifacts in the Operational, Capability, System and
Project Viewpoints.
Data for Service are used in the six core processes in the following ways:
a. JCIDS, PPBE, DAS and SE:
1) Services, such as those reified into web or computer based software services
(Software as a Service (SaaS), are considered Performers and are used in the same
fashion (See Performer Usage in Core Processes 2.1.2).
b. Ops Planning:
1) Service functions (activities and processes) and resources support operational
Planning and other processes that facilitate the exchange of information among
 
68
=== page 69 ===
DM2 - Services
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:32 PM]
Performers, aid in decision making and support training. TT&P documents together
with training materials generally contain the Service used in Operations. 
2) Business processes (e.g. Administrative, Logistics, etc) also can be reified as
Services both manual and automated.  
c. CPM: 
1) 
Services such as SaaS can be part of a portofolio.
 
Presentation
Services are
 generally rendered using all the presentation techniques shown in Section
1.3. Typically Structural,
 behavioral and tree models are used to depict Services with
amplifying tabular information.
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
69
=== page 70 ===
DM2 - Project
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/project_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:40 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Project
A Project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create Resources of Desired Effects.
Projects are relevant to all six core processes. Projects form the major elements of the DAS
and are the primary focus of the DoD PPBE system.
The Primary Construct of the PPBE system is the Program Element (PE). The PE is defined
as:
Program Element: The program element is the basic building block of the
Future Years Defense Program. The PE describes the program mission and
identifies the organization responsible to perform the mission. A PE may consist
of forces, manpower, materiel (both real and personal property), services, and
associated costs, as applicable.
The key architectural construct within the Program Element is the Work Breakdown Structure
(WBS) subject to DoD Instruction 5000.2. The WBS is the primary instrument connecting an
Architectural Description to the Defense Acquisitions System and the PPBE processes. The
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is defined as:
Work Breakdown Structure: "A product-oriented family tree composed of
hardware, software, services, data, and facilities. The family tree results from
systems engineering efforts during the acquisition of a defense materiel item".
MIL-HDBK-881A provides guidance for constructing the WBS applicable to programs subject
to DoD Instruction 5000.2. The WBS is the process necessary for subdividing the major
product deliverables and project work into smaller more manageable components and it
serves as a valuable framework for the technical objectives, and therefore it is product-
oriented. Its elements should represent identifiable work products, whether they are
equipment, data, or related service products. A WBS is a product structure, not an
organizational structure, providing the complete definition of the work to be performed by all
participants and the required interfaces between them.
Hardware, software, services, data, and facilities are Resources in the DM2. The information
captured in the project administrative tool/techniques (e.g., Project Management Body of
Knowledge [PMBOK] 2004) provides the basis for resource information in the DM2. The WBS
forms the basis of reporting structures used for contracts requiring compliance with
ANSI/EIA 748 Earned Value Management System (EVMS) Guidelines and reports placed on
contract such as Contractor Cost Data Reporting (CCDR), Software Resource Data Report
(SRDR), Contract Performance Reports (CPR), and Contract Funds Status Reports (CFSR).
MIL-HDBK-881A states: ".the Program WBS and Contract WBS help document architectural
products in a system life cycle. The DoD Architecture Framework (DoDAF) V1.0 defines a
common approach for DoD Architecture Description development, presentation, and
integration for warfighting operations and business operations and processes."
Just as the system is defined and developed throughout its lifecycle, so is the WBS. In the
early Project phases of concept refinement, system architecture, and technology
development, the program WBS is usually in an early stage of development. The results of
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
70
=== page 71 ===
DM2 - Project
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/project_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:40 PM]
the Analysis of Material Approaches and the Analysis of Alternatives (AoA) provide the basis
for the evolution of the WBS at all stages of Project evolution. As the architectural design of
the project's product or service matures, so should the WBS. The WBS is a primary tool in
maintaining efficient and cost effective developments of products and services. The figure
below illustrates the evolution of the WBS during the lifecycle of Project.
Evolution of the Project WBS
A Project Plan contains the project WBS (including Tasks and responsible
Organizations). The Project
 Data Group (PDG) contains the essential data required for
defining a Project Plan, e.g., those required by DoD 5000.2:
a. Acquisition Strategy
b. Technology Development Strategy
c. System Engineering Plan.
The Tasks and Performers form the essential elements of the project's WBS. The use of both
Tasks and Performers focusing on products to be delivered (e.g., System, Service, etc.) in
the WBS is the essential premise of the product-oriented WBS defined in MIL-HDBK-881A.
The Project Plan also shows plans and initiatives to coordinate transition planning in a
documented program baseline, shows critical success factors, milestones, measures,
deliverables, and periodic program reviews.
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising Project is shown in Figure 13. There are
several items to note regarding this model:
a. Like all concepts in the DM2, Project has whole-part, temporal whole-part,
and super-subtype relationships so that major Projects can have minor Projects
within them, Projects can have time phases, and Projects can be categorized.
b. Because a Project involves execution of a plan composed of Activities
(Tasks), there is a flow of resources into the project's activities and a flow of
products out of them, as described by the Resource Flow data group. So this
model can describe a Project that results in a System, a Service, Personnel
Types (i.e., Training), Organizations (i.e., organizational development), Materiel,
or Locations (e.g., Facilities, Installations).
 
71
=== page 72 ===
DM2 - Project
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/project_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:40 PM]
c. Because technology is part of the Project, this group models the analog of
the DoDAF V 1.0 and V1.5 SV-9 (System and Services Technology Forecast)
and SV-8 (System and Services Evolution Description).
d. Many kinds of measures may be associated with a Project - needs,
satisfaction, performance, interoperability, organizational, and cost.
e. Measures and Rules can be assigned at all levels of the Project
decomposition. Top-level Measures and Rules (Conditions and Constraints)
could be assigned to the Vision, Goals, and Objectives (VGO). Lower-level
Measures and Rules can then be derived and assigned to compliance and test
criteria. When part
 of a legal contract, policy, or directive, formal agreement, or
contract instrument, the Rules constitute a principle portion of the requirements
for the Project.
DoDAF Meta Model for Project
 
Usage in
 Core Processes
Data for Projects are used in the following ways:
a. JCIDS
1)Project is the typical outcome of the JCIDS process when material solutions are
identified. 2)Non-material solutions may also result in projects
b. PPBE, DAS , and CPM
1)Project is the core element of the PPBE, DAS and CPM processes. The primary
construct of Project is the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). The WBS is the primary
reification within Project that relates Performers and Activities to Cost and Milestones.
As stated in MIL-HDBK-881A, the WBS is a continually evolving instrument from
Project conception to lifecycle management. This tracks closely with the evolution of
the architecture. As key Activities are refined into primary Activities and assigned to or
allocated to Performers, the WBS should mature and the project definition can gain
additional focus (reification).
2)Early Project WBSs may contain high-level Activities (Tasks, Processes, System
Functions, or Service Functions). As the Project matures, the WBS identifies the
72
=== page 73 ===
DM2 - Project
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/project_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:40 PM]
system components, such as subsystems and software configuration items (SCIs). The
SCIs can be software services or individually testable and deliverable packages of
software. Depending on the acquisition strategy, all or part of the Project WBS and,
depending on acquisition strategy, may become the Contract WBS and form the basic
outline of the requirements in a statement of work and the project Statement of
Objectives (SOO) or Specification. The figure below illustrates this method. 
3)The other, non-materiel portions of the WBS (Work Packages, Task and Activities)
are derived in a similar fashion, i.e., Activities assigned to or allocated to Performers
that are, in turn, assigned to Organizations, Personnel and Facilities.
c. SE  
The data
 derived from Architectural Descriptions, derived through the systems
engineering process, directly support the definition and structuring of Projects. The
DoDAF architectural data elements are used in the WBS, Architecture based and
Classical Specifications and the SOW essential to the systems engineering process.
The DoDAF augments classical System Engineering techniques by standardizing the
lexicon and relationships. The figure below illustrates the typical systems engineering
process and its relationship to DODAF constructs. The process shows how operational
needs, as described in description documents such as the Capabilities Description
Document (CDD), are translated into structured, engineerable requirements and
associated Project constructs. Further, this shows how capabilities and processes are
transformed into Solutions through automation tradeoffs and Analysis of Alternatives
(AoA). Various alternatives are iterated through the architectural descriptions to meet
the required performance, cost, and schedule constraints. From here, Functional and
Allocated baselines can be established. As increased detail is added to the
architecture, classical systems engineering and design techniques are increasingly
applied.
d. Ops Planning: 
1)Project also is used in Operational Planning in such areas as developing specific
Mission Plans and procedures. Any effort in the Operational community requiring
identifiable funding and management can be defined as a Project.
Derivation of the Materiel Portion of the WBS
(click to enlarge)
73
=== page 74 ===
DM2 - Project
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/project_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:40 PM]
 
Architectural Description Usage in Forming Project Structure Reified in the
WBS
 
Presentation
Project presentation
 techniques are typically use Tree models (WBS), Timeline Models and
Tabular information (e.g. spread sheets). Tree models containing products and organizations
are represented in the PDG as whole-part breakdowns of the overall end-product and
participating organizations of the project. The figure below illustrates how a whole-part
structure can be used to partition the Project into manageable subprojects, identify where
common off-the-shelf-building blocks (Reuse) can be utilized, and identify all components of
the system. In the acquisition stages, the level of breakdown of this decomposition is
dependent on perspective (e.g., SoS, Enterprise, System, etc.) and acquisition strategy.
 
74
=== page 75 ===
DM2 - Project
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/project_mm.html[3/3/2011 3:43:40 PM]
Non-prescriptive, Illustrative Example of System Project Decomposition Used
to Develop the Product Portion of the WBS
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
75
=== page 76 ===
DM2 - Reification
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/reification.html[3/3/2011 3:43:44 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Reification
Architectural descriptions such as activity models are example of architectural descriptions
that reified at many level of detail. In a typical development project, the architecture
descriptions (contained in plans, specifications and/or "model based" Computer Aided Design
Tools (CAD)) provide increasing levels of detail as the project progresses through the normal
DoD Milestone process. This is what John Zachman calls "levels of reification", as shown in
the figure below.
Reification of Architectural Descriptions at Varying Levels
(Click image to enlarge)
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising reification is shown in the figure below.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
76
=== page 77 ===
DM2 - Reification
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/reification.html[3/3/2011 3:43:44 PM]
DoDAF Meta Model for Reification
(Click image to enlarge)
 
Usage in
 Core Processes
Reification is used in the six core processes in the following ways:
a. JCIDS: Refinement and increased levels of detail of capability and solution constraint
descriptions from ICD to CPD.
b. PPBE: Refinement in
 Project or Program Work Breakdown Structures (WBSs) and Cost
to complete estimates.
c. DAS: Refinement and Increase detail of design and architectural descriptions through
the milestone review process.
d. SE:
1) Refinement and Increase detail of design and architectural descriptions through the
various design and development stages.
2) Clearly described functional allocations and traceability throughout the various
levels of architectural descriptions (e.g. specifications, architectural view and models). 
e. Ops Planning: Refinement and
 increasing levels of detail in Tactics, Techniques and
Procedures throughout the stages of operational plan development.
f. CPM: Refinement and
 increased detail in the descriptions of the capability,
performance, functionality and cost effectiveness of the portfolio.
Presentation
Reification is depicted throughout all the elements of the architectural descriptions. It is
evident in all levels of design detail or refinement. From one level to another level different
people become involved in the architecture and design process. The reification process
illustrates that at different levels, "one person's design becomes the next person's
requirement". Reification can take all forms of descriptive techniques. Typically the
structural, behavior, tree models and views will be present throughout all the normal
programs documentation (e.g. specifications, system engineering plans, procedural
 
77
=== page 78 ===
DM2 - Reification
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/reification.html[3/3/2011 3:43:44 PM]
documents, training manuals, doctrine publications, etc.)
 
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
78
=== page 79 ===
DM2 - Organizational Structure
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/organizational.html[3/3/2011 3:43:47 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Organizational Structure
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising organizational structure is shown in the
figure below.
DoDAF Meta Model for Organizational Structure
(Click image to enlarge)
Usage in Core Process
Presentation
 
 
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
79
=== page 80 ===
DM2 - Organizational Structure
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/organizational.html[3/3/2011 3:43:47 PM]
 
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
80
=== page 81 ===
DM2 - Measures
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/measures.html[3/3/2011 3:43:50 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Measures
A measure is the magnitude of some attribute of an object. Measures provide a way to
compare objects, whether Projects, Services, Systems, Activities, or Capabilities. The
comparisons can be between like objects at a point in time, or the same object over time.
For example, a Capability may have different measures when looking at the current baseline
and over increments toward some desired end-state.   Measures 
play a much greater, central
role in DoDAF V2.0, compared to earlier versions of DoDAF. This change has multiple
drivers, including: Core Process use of architectural data. Those management and
engineering processes depend on quantification as a means of improving objectivity,
accountability, and efficiency of the processes. Federal Enterprise Architecture (FEA)
Performance Reference Model.  There 
are many kinds of Measures that are applicable to
many architecture elements. These are described in the following paragraph.
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising Measures, is depicted in the figure below.
DoDAF Meta Model for Measures
(Click image to enlarge)
 
The following
 should be noted about the Measures Data Group:
a. The key elements of the Measure Data group are Measure and Measure Type. Measure
refers to the actual measure value and units. It relates to a Measure Type that
describes what is being measured. Examples of each are shown below in the table
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
81
=== page 82 ===
DM2 - Measures
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/measures.html[3/3/2011 3:43:50 PM]
below.
Non-prescriptive, Illustrative Examples of Measures and Measure Types
b. Formally, a Measure defines membership criteria for a set or class; e.g., the set of all
things that has 2 kg mass. The relationship between Measure and Measure Type is
that any particular Measure is an instance of all the possible sets that could be taken
for a Measure Type.
c. The lower part of Figure 20 depicts the upper tiers of a Measure Type taxonomy or
classification scheme. It is expected that architects would add more detailed types
(make the taxonomy more specialized), as needed, within their federate. Note that
Service Level has multiple inheritances because a Service QoS or Service Level
Agreement (SLA) could address User Needs, User Satisfaction, Interoperability, or
Performance.
d. All Measure Types have a Rule that prescribes how the Measure is accomplished; e.g.,
units, calibration, or procedure. Spatial measures' Rules include coordinate system
rules. For example, latitude and longitude are understandable only by reference to a
Geodetic coordinate system around the Earth.
e. As a Measure Type, cost can be captured in the architecture at different levels, based
on the Process-owners requirements
f. The upper part of the figure above depicts how Measures apply to architecture
elements. Note that they apply to relationships between objects; e.g., the Measure
applies to a Performer performing an Activity. The Activity has a relationship to
Measure Type that says what Measure Types apply to an Activity. This represents
Universal Joint Task List (UJTL) tasks and their applicable Measure Types, including
Conditions, that is, Condition is quantified by a Measure Type. (The whole-part
relationship feature of Condition allows it to be singular.) This is accomplished by
Condition's typeInstance association, saying an elementary Condition is a member
(instance) of a Measure Type class.
Usage in Core Processes
Data for Measures are used in the six core processes in the following ways:
PPBE and JCIDS:
1. Planning – adequacy analysis: From an
 adequacy point of view, Measures that are
 
82
=== page 83 ===
DM2 - Measures
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/measures.html[3/3/2011 3:43:50 PM]
associated with a Capability (including Capability increment, since Capabilities have
whole-part inheritance). Capabilities can be compared with the Measures associated
with the Performers to see if the Performer solution(s) are adequate. A set of
alternative Performers as part of an Analysis of Alternatives could also be evaluated.
Goals or Desired Effects could compare with Measures associated with Performers.
2. Programming – overlap analysis: The purpose
 of an overlap analysis is to determine if
there are overlaps, or undesired duplicative capability, in the spending plan, portfolio,
capabilities development, or acquisition plan. Similar functionality is often only an
indicator of overlapping or duplicative capability. Often Performers with similar
functionality operate under different Measures which are not duplicative or overlapping
capability. For example, operational-level situation awareness systems may not be as
fast or precise as a tactical-level, but they may handle a larger number of objects
over a larger area.
3. Goal Setting: Measures are
 often part of Goals; e.g., production or efficiency Goals.
4. Requirements: Requirements often
 have Measure elements.
5. Capability Evolution: Measures are
 part of capability evolution, showing increments of
measurable improvement as the capability evolves and allowing monitoring about
when the capability is projected to be achieved or has already been achieved.
SE and DAS:
1. System Engineering/Design: Measures set
 the design envelope goals, sometimes
called performance characteristics or attributes. They can also set the constraints;
e.g., cost constraints.
2. Performance–Cost Tradeoffs: Measures of
 performance (e.g., effectiveness) can be
compared to different costs to evaluate and make decisions about alternative
solutions.
3. Benchmarking: Measures can
 be used to establish benchmarks of performance, such
as for a personnel skill or a radar tracking accuracy test.
4. Organizational and Personnel Development: Organizational and
 personnel goals are
often established and then monitored using Measures.
5. Capacity Planning: Measures can
 be used to plan for needed capacity; e.g., for
networks, training programs.
6. Quality of Service (QoS) Description: In SOA,
 QoS is often expressed as a Measure;
e.g., bit loss rate or jitter. These Measures show up in the service description and are
part of service discovery, so users can discover access to capabilities that meet their
quality requirements.
7. Project Constraints: Measures such
 as cost and risk can be constraints on Projects.
CPM:
1. Portfolio Balancing. Measures can
 be used to balance a portfolio so that it achieves the
right mix of goals and constraints.
Ops Planning:
1. Organizational and Personnel Development. Organizational and
 personnel goals are
often established and then monitored using Measures.
Presentation
Presentation Measures are typically displayed in tabular form and are usually tied to
Structural, Behavioral or Tree models and their constituent elements. Measures can also be
represented in a tree structure illustrating the traceability of derived metric requirements.
 
Go to top of page ↑
83
=== page 84 ===
DM2 - Measures
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/measures.html[3/3/2011 3:43:50 PM]
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
84
=== page 85 ===
DM2 - Locations
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/locations.html[3/3/2011 3:43:53 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Locations
A location is a point or extent in space. The need to specify or describe Locations occurs in
some Architectural Descriptions when it is necessary to support decision-making of a core
process. Examples of core process analyzes in which locations might have a bearing on the
decisions to be made include the following:
1. Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) (SE process).
2. Capability for a new regional command (JCIDS).
3. Communications or logistics planning in a mission area (Ops process).
4. System and equipment installation and Personnel Type assignments to Facilities
(Operations and SE processes).
Examples where Locations play little, if any, role in the process are:
1. Prioritization of precision engagement programs (PPBE and portfolio management
processes).
2. Streamlining of a business process (SE process).
3. Doctrine development (JCIDS and Operations processes).
The role of Locations in the decision process was implicit in earlier versions of DoDAF. In this
version, they are treated explicitly and precisely to allow more rigorous analysis of
requirements (e.g., communications or logistics planning) and clearer differentiation among
solutions alternatives).
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta-model for the data comprising Locations is shown in the figure below. 
There are several items to note:
a. Addresses such as URLs, Universal Resource Names (URNs), postal addresses, data
link addresses, etc. are considered Names for Locations. For example, a postal
address is a naming system for the Location of a building. A Universal Resource
Locator is a name for a server that is located somewhere on the Web.
b. The naming pattern works by identifying the following:
1) the name string, 
2) the object being named, and 
3) the type of name (e.g., postal address). Name here is used in the broadest sense,
such that a description is considered a long name.
c. The lower left of the diagram is a model of types of Location objects. These can be
alternatively named using the naming pattern in the upper left and delineated using
the Extent pattern in the lower right.
d. Minimal parts of the Spatial Extent (Point, Line, Surface, and Solid Volume) are
detailed because of the varying requirements within a federate. That is, member of
the federate may need to specialize the Spatial Extents. Some common and simple
classes are modeled, such as a Line described by two Points and a Planar Surface
defined by a Line and Point.
e. Facilities are types of Locations. In prior versions of DoDAF it was not clear if a Facility
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
85
=== page 86 ===
DM2 - Locations
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/locations.html[3/3/2011 3:43:53 PM]
could be thought of as a system or just a Location. This is now clarified. To describe
the functionality of a Facility, the Activities performed by the Performers located at the
Facility are described.
f. Installation, Site, and Facility follow Army guidance from the Real Property Inventory
Requirements (RIPR). Similarly, a Facility can be a linear structure, such as a road or
pipeline.
g. Geofeatures (called FEATURE in Joint Consultation, Command and Control Information
Exchange Data Model (JC3IEDM)) cover man-made control features, as well as
geophysical features (including meteorological and oceanographic phenomena).
DoDAF Meta Model for Locations
(Click image to enlarge)
Additional considerations in modeling Location data are as follows:
a. For many architecture applications, a locating scheme is some kind of geometric
system because many uses (see next paragraph) require geometric calculations.  
b. Named locations
 (e.g., facility, base, installation, region names) can be applicable
since their use may be merely to describe where performance occurs. In addition, the
naming pattern basically can use the name as a surrogate for the geometric location,
such as postal addresses are rarely applicable to architectures.
c. If a geometric system is needed, the coordinate system, reference frame, and units
are chosen. The Geospatial Markup Language (GML) defines 26 different kinds of
coordinate systems, including one called user defined. In many cases, a federate may
choose reference to GML so issues like handed-ness and orientation don't have to be
defined again.
d. The accuracy should be determined. For many uses, Locations may not need to be as
accurate as some Geospatial system can be, since the use calculation may have many
approximations, assumptions, and minor influencing variables that are chosen to be
ignored.
e. In some cases, there may be need for speed and acceleration ranges. Since these are
unusual, they are not part of the core DM2 but would be added as extensions for these
kinds of models. The speed could be extended as an attribute or as a trajectory
consisting of a set of spatial-temporal points, where the trajectory is a whole and the
points are parts.
 
86
=== page 87 ===
DM2 - Locations
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/locations.html[3/3/2011 3:43:53 PM]
Usage in Core Processes
Data for Locations are used to describe where Performers perform. The Location concept
supported the system node in DoDAF V1.0 and V1.5. In DoDAF V2.0, it is generalized and
more precisely defined. Examples of the uses of the various types of Locations in all the core
processes are:
a. Facility Locations allow description that certain systems or organizations are located at
a specific facility. Note that the function of the Facility is determined by the Activities
performed by the Performers located at the Facility; that is, the Facility itself is not a
Performer.
b. Installation Locations allow descriptions of certain organizations that operate or use an
installation.
c. Region Locations are used to describe what Performers and Activities are performed in
certain regions.
d. A Point Location can be used to state when a Performer is located at a specific Point;
e.g., latitude and longitude. When the location is not that specific, Regions, Countries,
and other geometric shapes can be used.
e. Line (set of lines) allows description of Performers located on, beside, or within some
enclosing lines. The line could be described mathematically so that it could specify an
orbit, e.g., that certain satellites are in some orbit.
f. Volume, e.g., that some systems cover a certain volume; e.g., an air defense system.
g. Addresses (names for locations) allow descriptions of where something is located
using the address scheme; e.g., the URL address scheme allows for looking up the
internet protocol (IP) and then the files on the server.
Presentation
Location is typically represented in architecture in pictorial diagrams, however tabular and
other representations may be used depending on the "Fit-for-Purpose" application.  In many
instances,
 locations are depicted in conjunction with typical models and view used in
architectural descriptions.
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
87
=== page 88 ===
DM2 - Pedigree
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/pedigree.html[3/3/2011 3:43:56 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2 Data Groups
Pedigree
The pedigree data group represents the workflow for a Resource.  It describes  the Activities
used to produce a Resource, e.g., a piece of Information.  Of particularly
 high importance for
architectural descriptions, is the production of architecture description
information. (Architecture descriptions
 are types of Information since Information describes
some Thing and architecture descriptions describe the architecture.)  All aspects
 of the
production workflow are describable with the Pedigree data group including:
a. What Resources
 were consumed in the production of the Resource
b. What Performers
 performed the production
c. What Rules
 constrained the production activity
d. What metrics
 (Measures) applied to the production and the Resources consumed
e. Where did
 the production occur
Data Group Description
The DoDAF Meta Model for the data comprising Pedigree is shown in the figure below.
 
DoDAF Meta Model for Pedigree
(Click image to enlarge)
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
Performers
Resource Flows
Information and Data
Rules
Goals
Capability
Services
Project
Reification
Organizational Structure
Measures
Locations
Pedigree
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
88
=== page 89 ===
DM2 - Pedigree
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/pedigree.html[3/3/2011 3:43:56 PM]
Usage in Core Processes
Pedigree is used to demonstrate the rationale for architecture description choices.  In many
systems
 engineering and requirements analysis processes, it is the means by which
traceability information is maintained.
Presentation
Pedigree information is usually presented in traceability matrices, tables, or indented text.
Sometime reverse-traceability information is presented, wherein the source (e.g.,
requirement) is listed and then the architectural artifacts that satisfy it are shown next.
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
89
=== page 90 ===
Physical Exchange Specification
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PES.html[3/3/2011 3:37:04 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2
DoDAF Physical Exchange Specification (PES)
PES XSD downloads:
IDEAS Foundation
DM2 Foundation
DM2 Domain
IC-ISM
In the support of these, EA data must be exchanged and shared. The general pattern for this
exchange is shown in the figure below.
General Pattern for EA Information Sharing and Data Exchange
The information to be shared varies across the core processes and is determined by the
information needs of specific use cases within those core processes. Notional examples of
such use cases are shown in the figure below.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
90
=== page 91 ===
Physical Exchange Specification
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PES.html[3/3/2011 3:37:04 PM]
Notional EA Information Sharing Use Cases
Core process use case stakeholders work with EA data developers to determine what
information needs to be shared when in order to support the core process. A notional
example of the resultant information exchange in shown in the figure below. Note that in this
case, the data presented for decisions may not be EA data, but, rather, the analysis results
from analyzing EA data.
 
Notional Pattern of EA Information Sharing for Assessment Processes
When exchanging architectural data, the PES is the specification for the exchange. The PES
provides an efficient and standard means to ensure that data sharing can occur in a toolset-
agnostic, methodology-agnostic environment. Use of the by architects to document
architectural data and information in tools, through spreadsheets, or other means, and
deposit that data and organized information into federated repositories is facilitated by the
common understanding underlying the use of the PES.
91
=== page 92 ===
Physical Exchange Specification
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PES.html[3/3/2011 3:37:04 PM]
The DM2 PES XML schema (XSD) provides a neutral format for data exchange between EA
data and data sources including:
1. EA databases.
2. DoD Authoritative Source Databases (e.g., DoD Information Technology Portfolio
Repository [DITPR]).
3. Unified Profile for DoDAF and Ministry of Defence Architecture Framework (MODAF)
(UPDM) and SysML-based Unified Markup Language (UML) Tools.
4. Other Information Technology (IT) and enterprise architecture Tools.
5. Modeling and Simulation Tools that are used in EA assessments, e.g., AoA’s.
6. Reporting Tools, e.g., for Chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff Instruction (CJCSI) or
Department of Defense Instruction (DoDI) submission.
7. Systems Engineering Tools.
8. Other Federal agencies (e.g., Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Department of
Justice (DoJ).
9. Coalition partners and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
10. Other organizations with which DoD exchanges Enterprise Architecture (EA) data
(e.g., industry, States, National Government Organizations [NGO’s]).
This role is illustrated in the figure below.
Illustration of DM2 Role in Providing a Neutral Model for Data Exchange
Note that within any particular community above, there may be a data exchange format
particular to that community. A particularly important case is the UPDM-SysML XML
Metadata Interchange (XMI) format for data exchange of UML models. XMI provides a
neutral way to exchange model data, including diagram data, between UML tools. A universal
DM2 PES to XMI translation will allow UPDM-SysML tools to interoperate with the other tools
and data sources used in DoD EA.
XSD
The DM2 PES eXtensible Markup Language (XML) Schema Definitions (XSDs) is auto-
generated from the DM2 Logical Data Model.   No 
additional semantics are added or changed.
There are four DM2 PES XSD’s:
92
=== page 93 ===
Physical Exchange Specification
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PES.html[3/3/2011 3:37:04 PM]
1. IDEAS Foundation, version 1.0
2. DM2 additional foundation
3. Classification marking (externally controlled)
4. DM2 exchange data
The DM2 PES XSD used for data exchange has a very simple structure as shown in the figure
below.
Top-Level Structure of a the DM2 PES XSD for Exchange
The IdeasData section contains all the DM2 domain data in a flat structure with elements
linked together using standard XML document IDref’s. A piece of this flat structure is shown
in the figure below. All of the DM2 data that is to be exchanged is contained in this section.
Sample of the IdeasData Section of the DM2 PES XSD for Data Exchange
The IdeasViews section then specifies what DoDAF views this data pertains to. A sample of
this section is shown in the figure below. If a DM2 PES XML document is received and these
views are indicated as being represented in the dataset, this XSD can be used to validate the
document, to see that the mandatory data is present and that data that is not optional is not
contained.
93
=== page 94 ===
Physical Exchange Specification
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PES.html[3/3/2011 3:37:04 PM]
 
Sample of the IdeasViews Section of the DM2 PES XSD for Data Exchange
The PES XSD's can be downloaded here:
IDEAS Foundation
DM2 Foundation
DM2 Domain
IC-ISM
In-progress examples of DM2 PES XML documents are available to DM2 Working Group
members on the DM2 Collaboration Site www.silverbulletinc.com/dm2, and will be made
available to the entire EA community on the DoDAF Journal.
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
94
=== page 95 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DM2
DoDAF Formal Ontology
The DM2 is founded upon the International Defence Enterprise Architecture Specification
(IDEAS) (http://www.ideasgroup.org or http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IDEAS_Group) a formal
ontology foundation developed by the defense departments and ministries of the United
States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and Sweden in coordination the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). All  DoDAF concepts
 and concept relationships inherit several
rigorously defined mathematical properties from the IDEAS Founda tion. A view of the upper
levels of the IDEAS Foundation is shown in the figure below.
IDEAS Foundation Top-Level
The IDEAS Foundation is higher-order. It is extensional (see Extension [metaphysics]), using
physical existence as its criterion for identity. In practical terms, this means the ontology is
well suited to managing change-over time and identifying elements with a degree of
precision that is not possible using names alone. The methodology for defining the ontology
is very precise about criteria for identity by grounding reasoning about whether two things
are the same using something that can be accurately identified. So, comparing two
individuals, if they occupy precisely the same space at the same time, they are the same.
Clearly this only works for individuals, but the principle can be used to compare types too.
For two types to be the same, they must have the same members. If those members are
Background
Architecture Development
Meta-Model
Conceptual
Logical
PES
IDEAS Foundation
Ontology
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
95
=== page 96 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
individuals, their physical extents can be compared. If the members are types, then the
analysis continues until individuals are reached, then they can be compared. The advantage
of this methodology is that names are separated from things and so there is no possibility of
confusion about what is being discussed.  It is
 also four dimensionalist so that temporal parts
(or states) can be represented, along with before-after behaviors.   A 
partial bibliography of
research and reference material used in deriving the IDEAS Foundation is included in the
appendix to this document.
None of these foundation properties are unusual; they are all used in reasoning everyday.  
The basic
 concepts are:
1. Three basic types of Things:
Individuals are Things that exist in 3D space and time, i.e., have 4D spatial-
temporal extent.
Types, sets or collections of things.  Two important Types are distinguished –
ones whose members are Individuals and those whose members are other than
Individuals.  This 
is an important distinction between naïve set theory and type
theory.
Tuples, ordered relations between things, e.g., ordered pairs in 2D analytic
geometry, rows in relational database tables, and subject-verb-object triples in
Resource Description Framework.
2. Basic relationships:
Set theoretic:
Super-subtype; e.g., a type of system or service, capability, materiel,
organization, or condition.
Type-instance, similar to “element of” in set theory
Mereologic:
Whole-part; e.g., components of a service or system, parts of the data,
materiel parts, subdivisions of an activity, and elements of a measure.
Temporal whole-part; e.g., the states or phases of a performer, the
increments of a capability or projects, the sequence of a process
(activity).
4D Topologic:
Overlap
Before-after
Items of note:
1. Types include sets of Tuples and sets of sets.
2. Tuples can have other Tuples in their tuple places.
3. The participants in a super-subtype relationship can be from the same class, e.g., the
supertype can be an instance of Measure Type as well as the subtype. This allows for
representation of as much of a super-subtype taxonomy as is needed.
4. Power Type members are generated from some Type by taking all the possible
subsets of the members of the Type. For example consider the Type whose members
are a, b, c. The powerset would be:
5. For example, take the Individual Type AIRCRAFT, whose members include all the
aircraft of the world. The powerset generated from this set would have:
6. Some of these subsets are not used by anyone, e.g., the full set, the null set, or just
96
=== page 97 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
some random subset. However, the second one, which might be name F-15 Type, is
quite useful. The last example is not useful to most unless you are interested in the
first (assuming the subscript 1 means first) of any particular aircraft type, e.g., if you
were doing a study of first-off-the-line aircraft production lessons-learned. This is the
usefulness of Power Types and why they are employed in DM2: they allow for multiple
categorization schemes, according to someone else’s use, yet traceability back to the
common elements so that the relationships between multiple categorization schemes
can be understood. This was a DM2 requirement – multiple categorization schemes or
taxonomies – because across a large enterprise it is not possible to employ a single
categorization scheme; rather schemes vary depending on function. For example, a
weaponeer’s classifies ordnance is naturally different from a logistician’s, the former
concerned with delivery means, lethality, etc. and the latter with weight, size, and
other transportation issues.
7. Note also that a powerset can then be taken of the powerset. This allows for build up
of what is often called a taxonomic hierarchy. These are quite useful in enterprise
Architectural Descriptions.
The DM2 utilizes the formal ontology of IDEAS because it provides:
1. Mathematical rigor needed for precision Architectural Descriptions that can be
analyzed and used in detailed processes such as Systems Engineering and Operations
Planning.
type (~set) theory
4D mereotopology
2. Deals with issues of states, powertypes, measures, space -- what is truly knowable vs.
what is assumed
3. Separates signs and representations from referents
4. DM2 domain concepts are extensions to the formal foundation
Rigorously worked-out common patterns are reused:   Super- subtype, whole-
part, temporal whole-part, type-instance, before-after, overlap
Saved a lot of repetitive work – “ontologic free lunch”
Model compactness through inheritance of superclass properties and common
patterns.
Economizes implementations
Higher quality and consistency throughout due reuse of the rigorously worked-
out common patterns
5. Improved interoperation with Unified Profile for DoDAF and MODAF (UPDM)-SysML
tools which are following IDEAS concepts.
6. Improved opportunities for Coalition and NATO data exchange since MODAF is
following IDEAS and NAF is interested in following IDEAS.
7. Agreed-upon analysis principles that provide a principled basis for issue analysis
8. Better ability to integrate and analyze EA data for EA purposes.  
The advantage
 over free-text, structured documents, and databases in using this type of
mathematically structured information is somewhat explained by the figure below that shows
a spectrum of information structuring.
97
=== page 98 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
A Spectrum of Information Structuring
This shows that databases are really just storage and retrieval with connections only for
exactly matching pieces of information (e.g., "keys" or exactly matching strings).   The 
nature
and purposes of EA require more than just storage, retrieval, and exchange, e.g.,
integration, analysis, and assessment across datasets.  Founding 
DM2 on IDEAS provides the
ontologic foundation supports entailment and other sorts of mathematical understanding of
the data with membership (~ set theory) and 4D mereotopology (parts and boundaries).  
Some of
 these structures are so fundamental in human reasoning that it's hard to see that
computers don't have it at all.   But 
they are needed if we want to use them for something
more than just storage and retrieval.   They 
have to be encoded it into them with formal
methods.
Common Patterns
The re-use patterns useful to Architectural Descriptions are shown in the figure below.
98
=== page 99 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
DM2 Common Patterns
The IDEAS foundation concepts, common to all data groups are shown in the table below . It
is important to remember that even though these are not repeated in the descriptions of the
data groups, they are nevertheless present in the model and apply to the data group
concepts according to the Doman Class Hierarchy shown in the figures below.
IDEAS Foundation Concepts Applicable to all DoDAF Data Groups
IDEAS Concept Definition
Classes
DescriptionScheme A RepresentationScheme and DescriptionType
whose members are intentionally descriptions
IndividualPerformer A specific thing that can perform an action
Information
Information is the state of a something of interest
that is materialized -- in any medium or form --
and communicated or received.
InformationType Category or type of information
Location A point or extent in space that may be referred to
physically or logically.
LocationType The powertype of Location
Measure The magnitude of some attribute of an individual.
99
=== page 100 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
MeasureType A category of Measures
Performer
Any entity - human, automated, or any
aggregation of human and/or automated - that
performs an activity and provides a capability.
Representation A SignType where all the individual Signs are
intended to signify the same Thing.
RepresentationScheme
A RepresentationType that is a collection of
Representations that are intended to be the
preferred Representations in certain contexts.
Resource Data, Information, Performers, Materiel, or
Personnel Types that are produced or consumed.
Rule A principle or condition that governs behavior; a
prescribed guide for conduct or action 
ServiceLevel A measurement
 of the performance of a system or
service.
Thing The union of Individual, Type, and tuple.
Associations
beforeAfter
A couple that represents that the temporal extent
end time for the individual in place 1 is less than
temporal extent start time for the individual in
place 2.
BeforeAfterType
An association between two Individual Types
signifying that the temporal end of all the
Individuals of one Individual Type is before the
temporal start of all the Individuals of the other
Individual Type.
describedBy A tuple that asserts that Information describes a
Thing. 
descriptionSchemeInstance A representationSchemeInstance
 that asserts a
Description is a member of a DescriptionScheme.
endBoundary A temporal whole part couple that relates the
temporal boundary to the whole.
EndBoundaryType A temporal whole part couple that relates the
temporal boundary to the whole taken over a Type.
measureOfIndividualEndBoundary endBoundary is a member of Measure
measureOfIndividualStartBoundary startBoundary is a member of Measure
measureOfTypeEndBoundaryType endBoundaryType is a member of Measure
measureOfTypeStartBoundaryType startBoundaryType is a member of Measure
namedBy A couple that asserts that a Name describes a
Thing. 
A representationSchemeInstance
 that asserts a
100
=== page 101 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
namingSchemeInstance Name is a member of a NamingScheme.
overlap A couple of wholePart couples where the part in
each couple is the same.
OverlapType An overlap in which the places are taken by Types
only.
representationSchemeInstance A typeInstance that asserts a Representation is a
member of a RepresentationScheme.
representedBy A couple that asserts that a Representation
represents a Thing.
startBoundary The beginning of a temporalBoundary.
StartBoundaryType The beginning of a temporalBoundaryType.
superSubType An association in which one Type (the subtype) is a
subset of the other Type (supertype).
temporalBoundary The start and end times for the spatio-temporal
extent of an Individual
TemporalBoundaryType The start and end times for the Individual
members of a Type.
temporalWholePart
A wholePart that asserts the spatial extent of the
(whole) individual is co-extensive with the spatial
extent of the (part) individual for a particular
period of time.
TemporalWholePartType
 A couple
 between two Individual Types where for
each member of the whole set, there is a
corresponding member of the part set for which a
wholePart relationship exists, and conversely
typeInstance
A Thing can be an instance of a Type - i.e. set
membership. Note that IDEAS is a higher-order
model, hence Types may be instances of Types.
wholePart A couple that asserts one (part) Individual is part
of another (whole) Individual.
WholePartType
A coupleType that asserts one Type (the part) has
members that have a whole-part relation with a
member of the other Type (whole).
101
=== page 102 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
DM2 Domain Concepts are Subtypes (Extensions) of IDEAS Foundation
Concepts
DM2 Associations are Subtyped to IDEAS Mathematical Associations
IDEAS Foundation Mathematics
When creating or analyzing DM2 data, the following mathematical properties should be
followed.  (Note, 
this material is incomplete and will be provided in later versions of either
DM2 or IDEAS documentation. Additional sources
 for ontologic mathematics include: 1)
National Center for Ontologic Research (NCOR), http://ontology.buffalo.edu/smith/; 2) Direct
Model-Theoretic Semantics for OWL 2, http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-owl2-direct-
semantics-20091027/)
Type Theory Math
102
=== page 103 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
Mereotopologic Math
 
IDEAS Foundation
 Partial Bibliography
1. Berger, Peter L, and Thomas Luckmann; The Social Construction of Reality;
Doubleday & Company, Garden City, New York; 1966.
2. Casati, Roberto, and Achille C Varzi; Holes and other Superficialities; The MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts; 1995.
3. Casati, Roberto, and Achille C Varzi; Parts and Places: The Structure of Spatial
Representation; The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts; 1999.
4. Clark, Bowman L; “Individuals and Points”; Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, Vol.
26; 1985.
5. Coquand, Thierry; “Type Theory”; Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy; 2006.
6. Davenport, Thomas H, and Laurence Prusak; Working Knowlege: How Organizations
Manage What They Know; Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Massachusetts;
1998.
7. Gilbert, Margaret; On Social Facts; Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey;
1992.
8. Grenon, Pierre, and Barry Smith; “The Cornucopia of Formal-Ontological Relations”;
Dialectica. Vol. 58; 2004
9. Grenon, Pierre, and Barry Smith; “Snap and Span: Toward Dynamic Spatial
Ontology”; Spatial Cognition and Computation; Lawrence Erlbaum Assosiates, Inc,
Leipzig, Germany.
10. Hacking, Ian; Historical Ontology; Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts; 2002.
11. Hawley, Katherine; How Things Persist; Oxford University Press, Oxford; 2001
12. Janssen, Terry, et al; A Multi- INT Sematic Reasoning Framework for Intelligence
Analysis Support
103
=== page 104 ===
DoDAF Formal Ontology
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/Ontology1.html[3/3/2011 3:37:09 PM]
13. Kay, Paul; “Taxonomy and Semantic Contrast”; Language; Vols. 47, number4;
University of California, Berkeley, CA, 1971.
14. Kempson, Ruth M; Semantic Theory; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; 1977.
15. Levinson, Stephen C; Pragmatics; Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; 1984.
16. Lyons, John; Language, Meaning, & Context; Fontana Paperbacks, Great Britain; 1981.
17. Nerlich, Graham; The Shape of Space; Second ed; Cambridge University Press,New
York, NY; 1994.
18. Partee, Barbara H, Alice Ter Meulen, and Robert E Wall; Mathematical Methods in
Linguistics, Vol. 30; Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht; 1990.
19. Partridge, Chris; Business Objects: Re-Engineering for Re-Use; The Boro Centre;
2005.
20. Potter, Michael; Set Theory and its Philosophy; Oxford University Press, Oxford; 2004.
21. Pulman, S G; Word Meaning and Belief; Ed. James R Hurford and John A Hawkins;
Croom Helm Linguistics Series; Billing & Sons Limited, Great Britain; 1983.
22. Rea, M. C., “Four Dimensionalism” in The Oxford Handbook for Metaphysics. Oxford
Univ. Press
23. Sider, Theodore; Four Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time; Oxford
University Press, Oxford; 2001.
24. Simons, Peter; Parts: A Study in Ontology; Oxford University Press, Oxford; 1987.
25. Smith, Barry; “Against Fantology”; Experience and Analysis; By M E Reicher and J C
Marek; 2005.
26. Smith, Barry; “The Basic Tools of Formal Ontology”; Formal Ontology in Information
Systems; IOS Press, Amsterdam; Frontiers in Artifitial Intellegence and Applications;
1998
27. Smith, Barry; “Mereotopology: A Theory of Parts and Boundaries”; Data and
Knowledge Engineering; Department of Philosophy, Buffalo, New York; 1996.
28. Smith, Barry, and David M Mark; “Do Mountains Exist? Toward an Ontology of
Landforms.” Enviorment & Planning B (Planning and Design); National Center for
Geographic Information and Analysis, Buffalo, New York; 2009.
29. Stein, Lynn Andrea; “Imagination and Situated Cognition”; Thinking about Android
Epistemology; Ed. Kenneth M Ford, Clark Glymour, and Partick J Hayes; AAAI Press,
Menlo Park; 2006. Sider, Theodore. “Four Dimensionalism”. Philosophical Review. pp.
197-231
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
104
=== page 105 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/viewpoints.html[3/3/2011 3:34:05 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
DoDAF has been designed to meet the specific business and operational needs of the DoD. It
defines a way of representing an enterprise architecture that enables stakeholders to focus
on specific areas of interests in the enterprise, while retaining sight of the big picture. To
assist decision-makers, DoDAF provides the means of abstracting essential information from
the underlying complexity and presenting it in a way that maintains coherence and
consistency. One of the principal objectives is to present this information in a way that is
understandable to the many stakeholder communities involved in developing, delivering, and
sustaining capabilities in support of the stakeholder's mission. It does so by dividing the
problem space into manageable pieces, according to the stakeholder's viewpoint, further
defined as DoDAF-described Models.
Each viewpoint has a particular purpose, and usually presents one or combinations of the
following:
Broad summary information about the whole enterprise (e.g., high-level operational
concepts).
Narrowly focused information for a specialist purpose (e.g., system interface
definitions).
Information about how aspects of the enterprise are connected (e.g., how business or
operational activities are supported by a system, or how program management brings
together the different aspects of network enabled capability).
However, it should be emphasized that DoDAF is fundamentally about creating a coherent
model of the enterprise to enable effective decision-making. The presentational aspects
should not overemphasize the pictorial presentation at the expense of the underlying data.
DoDAF organizes the DoDAF-described Models into the following viewpoints:
The All Viewpoint describes the overarching aspects of architecture context that relate
to all viewpoints.
The Capability Viewpoint articulates the capability requirements, the delivery timing,
and the deployed capability.
The Data and Information Viewpoint articulates the data relationships and alignment
structures in the architecture content for the capability and operational requirements,
system engineering processes, and systems and services.
The Operational Viewpoint includes the operational scenarios, activities, and
requirements that support capabilities.
The Project Viewpoint describes the relationships between operational and capability
requirements and the various projects being implemented. The Project Viewpoint also
details dependencies among capability and operational requirements, system
engineering processes, systems design, and services design within the Defense
Acquisition System process. An example is the Vcharts in Chapter 4 of the Defense
Acquisition Guide.
The Services Viewpoint is the design for solutions articulating the Performers,
Activities, Services, and their Exchanges, providing for or supporting operational and
capability functions.
The Standards Viewpoint articulates the applicable operational, business, technical,
and industry policies, standards, guidance, constraints, and forecasts that apply to
capability and operational requirements, system engineering processes, and systems
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
105
=== page 106 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/viewpoints.html[3/3/2011 3:34:05 PM]
and services.
The Systems Viewpoint, for Legacy support, is the design for solutions articulating the
systems, their composition, interconnectivity, and context providing for or supporting
operational and capability functions.
A presentation of these viewpoints is portrayed in graphic format below:
 
DoDAF Viewpoints
DoDAF V2.0 is a more focused approach to supporting decision-makers than prior versions.
In the past, decision-makers would look at DoDAF offerings and decide which were
appropriate to their decision process. An example is the JCIDS process architecture
requirements inside the JCIDS documentation (ICD, CDD, CPD, etc.). Additionally, older
version Architectural Description products were hard-coded in regard to content and how
they were visualized. Many times, these design products were not understandable or useful
to their intended audience. DoDAF V2.0, based on process owner input, has increased focus
on architectural data, and a new approach for presenting architecture information has
addressed the issues. The viewpoints categorize the models as follows:
As illustrated below, the original viewpoints (Operational Viewpoint, Systems and
Services Viewpoint, Technical Standards Viewpoint, and the All Viewpoint) have had
their Models reorganized to better address their purposes. The Services portion of the
older Systems and Services Viewpoint is now a Services Viewpoint that addresses in
more detail our net-centric or services-oriented implementations.
106
=== page 107 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/viewpoints.html[3/3/2011 3:34:05 PM]
DoDAF V1.5 Evolution to DoDAF V2.0
All the models of data (conceptual, logical, or physical) have been placed into the Data
and Information Viewpoint rather than spread throughout the Operational Viewpoint
and Systems and Services Viewpoints.
The Systems Viewpoint accommodates the legacy system descriptions.
The new Standards Viewpoint can now describe business, commercial, and doctrinal
standards, as well as the technical standards applicable to our solutions, which may
include systems and services.
The Operational Viewpoint now can describe rules and constraints for any function
(business, intelligence, warfighting, etc.) rather that just those derived from data
relationships.
Due to the emphasis within the Department on Capability Portfolio Management and
feedback from the Acquisition community, the Capability Viewpoint and Project
Viewpoint have been added through a best-of-breed analysis of the MODAF and NAF
constructs.
Workshops have brought the Systems Engineering community and the architecture
community closer together in defining the DoDAF architecture content that would be useful
to the Systems Engineering process, and this has resulted in an understanding which the
entire set of viewpoints and the underlying architectural data can be used in the System
Engineering processes. There is not a set of separate System Engineering viewpoint or
DoDAF-described Models as the system engineer and system engineering decision-makers
can use the existing DoDAF-described Models and their own defined Fit-for-Purpose Views.
The approach to the presentation of Architectural Description moves away from static and
rigid one-size-fits-all templates of architecture portrayals for architects. The term we have
coined is "Fit-for-Purpose" presentation. Through various techniques and applications, the
presentation of Architectural data increases customer understanding and architecture's
usefulness to decision-making by putting the data underlying the architectural models into
the context of the problem space for each decision-maker.
Viewpoint and DoDAF-described Model Descriptions
The following DoDAF Viewpoints and DoDAF-described Models are discussed below with
107
=== page 108 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/viewpoints.html[3/3/2011 3:34:05 PM]
some details, such as model uses and model descriptions:
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
For the DoDAF-described Model descriptions, a major source of material was adapted from
MODAF. In addition, a note on system engineering is included.
The Views described in DoDAF, including those that are legacy Views from previous
versions of the Framework, are provided as pre-defined examples that can be used when
developing presentations of architectural data.
DoDAF is prescribed for the use and development of Architectural Descriptions in the
Department. Specific DoDAF-described Models for a particular purpose are prescribed by
process-owners. All the DoDAF-described Models do not have to be created. DoDAF V2.0
is "Fit-for-Purpose", based on the decision-maker needs. DoDAF does not prescribe any
particular Views, but instead concentrates on data as the necessary ingredient for
architecture development. However, other regulations and instructions from both DoD
and CJCS may have particular presentation view requirements. These Views are
supported by DoDAF 2.0, and should be consulted for specific view requirements.
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
108
=== page 109 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - All Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/all_view.html[3/3/2011 3:37:12 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
All Viewpoint
There are some overarching aspects of an Architectural Description that are captured in the
AV DoDAF-described Models. The AV DoDAF-described Models provide information pertinent
to the entire Architectural Description rather than representing a distinct viewpoint. AV
DoDAF-described Models provide an overview of the architecturectural effort including such
things as the scope, context, rules, constraints, assumptions, and the derived vocabulary
that pertains to the Architectural Description. It captures the intent of the Architectural
Description to help ensure its continuity in the face of leadership, organizational, and other
changes that can occur over a long development effort.
All Viewpoint Model Descriptions
Models Descriptions
AV-1 Overview and Summary
Information
Describes a Project's Visions, Goals, Objectives,
Plans, Activities, Events, Conditions, Measures,
Effects (Outcomes), and produced objects.
AV-2 Integrated Dictionary An architectural data repository with definitions
of all terms used throughout the architectural
data and presentations.
 
Uses of
 All Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models.  The AV DoDAF-described Models
captures the scope of the architecture and where the architecture fits in relationship to other
architectures. Another use of the All Viewpoint is for the registration of the architecture to
support the net-centric goals of making Architectural Descriptions visible (Discoverable).
Mappings of the All Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models to the DM2 Concepts, Associations,
and Attributes are in DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes Mapping to DoDAF-
described Models. The DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes are described in the
DoDAF Meta-model Data Dictionary .
 
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
109
=== page 110 ===
All Viewpoints - Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/AV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:43:59 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
All Viewpoint
AV-1 Overview and Summary Information . The overview and summary information
contained within the AV-1 provides executive-level summary information in a consistent
form that allows quick reference and comparison between Architectural Descriptions. The
written content of the AV-1 content describes the concepts contained in the pictorial
representation of the OV-1.
The AV-1 frames the context for the Architectural Description. The AV-1 includes
assumptions, constraints, and limitations that may affect high-level decisions relating to an
architecture-based work program. It should contain sufficient information to enable a reader
to select a single Architectural Description from among many to read in more detail. The AV-
1 serves two additional purposes:
In the initial phases of architecture development, it serves as a planning guide.
When the architecture is built, the AV-1 provides summary information concerning
who, what, when, why, and how of the plan as well as a navigation aid to the models
that have been created.
The usage of the AV-1 is to:
Scope the architecture effort.
Provide context to the architecture effort.
Define the architecture effort.
Summarize the findings from the architecture effort.
Assist search within an architecture repository.
Detailed Description:
An enterprise has an architecture, which is manifested through an Architectural Description
(in this case, a DoDAF described Architectural Description). That Architectural Description
consists of a number of populated views each of which is an instance of a specific model or a
combination of model. DoDAF consists of a set of viewpoints and these are organized in
terms of models. Each model is associated with a specific set of concerns that certain
stakeholders have, and which the models constructed are intended to address. The
stakeholder groupings tend to align with the model definitions within a viewpoint (so the
DoDAF Operational Viewpoint relates to operational stakeholders, i.e., end users). Finally
each Architectural Description has a rationale that governs the selection of Models that will
be used and the scope of the underlying models. The AV-1 is intended to describe this.
The AV-1 is usually a structured text product. An architecting organization may create a
template for the AV-1 that can then be used to create a consistent set of information across
different architecture-based projects. While the AV-1 is often dispensed with or "retrofitted"
to a finished architecture package, it's desirable to do it up-front because the AV-1 provides
a summary of a given Architectural Description and it documents the following descriptions:
Architectural Description Identification - Identifies the Architectural Description effort
name, the architect, and the organization developing the Architectural Description. It
also includes assumptions and constraints, identifies the approving authority and the
completion date, and records the level of effort required to develop the Architectural
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
110
=== page 111 ===
All Viewpoints - Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/AV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:43:59 PM]
Description.
Scope - Identifies the Viewpoints, DoDAF-described Models, and Fit-for-Purpose Views
that have been selected and developed. The AV-1 should address the temporal nature
of the Architectural Description, such as the time frame covered, whether by specific
years or by designations such as "current", "target", or transitional. Scope also
identifies the organizational entities and timelines that fall within the scope of the
Architectural Description.
Purpose and perspective - Explains the need for the Architectural Description, what it
will demonstrate, the types of analyses that will be applied to it, who is expected to
perform the analysis, what decisions are expected to be made based of each form of
analysis, who is expected to make those decisions, and what actions are expected to
result. The perspective from which the Architectural Description is developed is
identified.
Context - Describes the setting in which an Architectural Description exists. Context
includes such things as: mission, doctrine, relevant goals and vision statements,
concepts of operation, scenarios, information assurance context (e.g., types of system
or service data to be protected, such as classified or sensitive but unclassified, and
expected information threat environment), other threats and environmental
conditions, and geographical areas addressed, where applicable. Context also identifies
authoritative sources for the standards, rules, criteria, and conventions that are used
in the architecture. Any linkages to parallel architecture efforts should be identified.
Status - Describes the status of the architecture at the time of publication or
development of the AV-1 (which might precede the architectural development itself).
Status refers to creation, validation and assurance activities.
Tools and File Formats Used - Identifies the tool suite used to develop the
Architectural Description and file names and formats for the Architectural Models if
appropriate.
Assumptions and Constraints.
Archtecture development schedule including start date, development milestones, date
completed, and other key dates. Further details can be reflected in the Project
Viewpoint.
If the architecture is used to support an analysis, the AV-1 may be extended to include:
Findings - States the findings and recommendations that have been developed based
on the architectural effort. Examples of findings include: identification of shortfalls,
recommended system implementations, and opportunities for technology insertion.
Costs - the architecture budget, cost projections, or actual costs that have been
incurred in developing the architecture and/or undertaking the analysis. This might
include integration costs, equipment costs and other costs.
During the course of developing an Architectural Description, several versions of the AV-1
may be produced. An initial version may focus the effort and document its scope, the
organizations involved, and so forth. After other Models within an Architectural Description's
scope have been developed and verified, another version may be produced to document
adjustments to the scope and to other aspects of the Architectural Description that may
have been identified. After an Architectural Description has been used for its intended
purpose, and the appropriate analysis has been completed, a final version should be
produced to summarize these findings for high-level decision-makers. In this version, the
AV-1 and a corresponding graphic in the form of an OV-1 serve as an executive summary of
the Architectural Description. The AV-1 can be particularly useful as a means of
communicating the methods that have been applied to create models and the rationale for
grouping these models. Viewing assumptions that have shaped individual models may also
be included. In this form, the AV-1 needs to list each individual model and provide a brief
commentary.
This could take several forms:
111
=== page 112 ===
All Viewpoints - Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/AV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:43:59 PM]
It could refer to one or more DoDAF-described Models.
It could refer to the DoDAF Community of Practice.
It could refer to a focus for the work, e.g., integration or security.
It could refer to a combination of these.
Finally, each Architectural Description has a rationale that governs the selection of the
Models used and the scope of the underlying models as a result of employing the 6-Step
Architecture Development Process. The AV-1 DoDAF-described Model is intended to describe
the decisions made throughout that process.
AV-2: Integrated Dictionary  >>
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
112
=== page 113 ===
All Viewpoints - Integrated Dictionary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/AV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:02 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
All Viewpoint
AV-2: Integrated Dictionary . The AV-2 presents all the metadata used in an architecture.
An AV-2 presents all the data as a hierarchy, provides a text definition for each one and
references the source of the element (e.g., DoDAF Meta-model, IDEAS, a published
document or policy).
An AV-2 shows elements from the DoDAF Meta-model that have been described in the
Architectural Description and new elements (i.e., not in the DM2) that have been introduced
by the Architectural Description.
It is essential that organizations within the DoD use the same terms to refer to a thing.
Because of the interrelationship among models and across architecture efforts, it is useful to
define common terminology with common definitions (referred to as taxonomies) in the
development of the models within the Architectural Description. These taxonomies can be
used as building blocks for DoDAF-described Models and Fit-for-Purpose Views within the
Architectural Description. The need for standard taxonomies derives from lessons learned
from early DoD Architectural Description development issues as well as from federation pilots
conducted within the Department. Federation of Architectural Descriptions were made much
more difficult because of the use of different terminology to represent the same architectural
data. Use of taxonomies to build models for the architecture has the following benefits over
free-text labeling:
Provides consistency across populated views, based on DoDAF-described Models.
Provides consistency across Architectural Descriptions.
Facilitates Architectural Description development, validation, maintenance, and re-use.
Traces architectural data to authoritative data sources.
This is facilitated by the DM2. Architectural Descriptions can often introduce new terms -
possibly because the architecture is covering new technology or business activities. The
purpose of the AV-2 is to provide a means to explain the terms and abbreviations used in
building the architecture and, as necessary, submit them for review and inclusion into
authoritative vocabularies developed by COIs that are pertinent to the Architectural
Description content.
In the creation of any Architectural Description, reuse of authoritative external taxonomy
content, e.g., the FEA Reference Models, or the Joint Common System Function List, or any
listed in Architecture Resources, are important to aligning the architectural content across
many descriptions to increase their understandability, interoperability, Architecture
Federation, and compliance. A discussion on the use of taxonomies in the development of
the AV-2 and the architecture effort is below.
Detailed Description:
The AV-2 content can be organized by the following areas within the DM2 that can be used
to expedite architecture development:
Capabilities: The taxonomy should minimally consist of names, descriptions, and
conditions that may be applicable to performance measures.
Resource Flow. The taxonomy should minimally consist of names of information
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
113
=== page 114 ===
All Viewpoints - Integrated Dictionary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/AV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:02 PM]
elements exchanged, descriptions, decomposition into constituent parts and subtypes,
and mapping to system data elements exchanged.
Activities (Operational Activities or Tasks). The taxonomy should minimally consist of
names, descriptions, and decomposition into the constituent parts that comprise an
activity.
Activities (System or Service Functions). The taxonomy should minimally consist of
names, descriptions, and decomposition into the constituent parts that comprise a
system function.
Performance Parameters. The taxonomy should minimally consist of names,
descriptions, units of measure, and conditions that may be applicable to performance
parameters.
Performers: Performers can be persons, services, systems or organizations. The
taxonomy should minimally consist of names, descriptions, breakdowns into
constituent parts (e.g., a services comprising other services), and applicable
categorizations. Each of the above types of performers is a candidate for a being a
taxonomy.
Skills: The taxonomy should minimally consist of names, descriptions, units of
measure, and conditions that may be applicable to performance parameters.
Standards: The taxonomy should minimally consist of categories of standards (e.g.,
DoD Information Technology Standards and Profile Registry [DISR]'s Service Areas).
Triggers/Events: The taxonomy minimally consists of names, descriptions, and
breakdown into constituent parts of the event or trigger and categorization of types of
events or triggers.
Not all architectural data in a given taxonomy is useful in every case of architectural
development. However, given the ongoing evolutionary change in organizations, services,
systems, and activities, the value of using established, validated taxonomic structures that
can be expanded or contracted as needed becomes obvious. Moreover, the development of
new models over time is greatly simplified as understanding of the taxonomies is increased.
Standard taxonomies, like DISR Service Categories, become building blocks for more
comprehensive, quality architectural DoDAF-described Models and Fit-for-Purpose Views.
The DoD Extensible Markup Language Registry and Clearinghouse and the Net-Centric
Implementation Document (NCID) are potential sources for taxonomies.
In some cases, a specific community may have its own operational vocabulary. This local
operational vocabulary may use the same terms in radically different ways from other
operational communities. (For example, the use of the term track refers to very different
concepts in the carrier battle group community than in the mine-sweeper community. Yet
both of these communities are Navy operational groups and may participate together in
littoral warfare task forces.) In these cases, the internal community versions of the models
and views within the Architectural Description should use the vocabulary of the local
operational community to achieve community cooperation and buy-in. Data elements need
to be uniquely identified and consistently used across all viewpoints, models and views
within the Architectural Description. These populated views should include notes on any
unique definitions used and provide a mapping to standard definitions, where possible.
<< AV-1: Integrated Dictionary
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
114
=== page 115 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Capability Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/capability.html[3/3/2011 3:37:17 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Capability Viewpoint
The Capability Viewpoint and the DoDAF-described Models within the viewpoint are
introduced into DoDAF V2.0 to address the concerns of Capability Portfolio Managers. In
particular, the Capability Models describe capability taxonomy and capability evolution.
The DoD increasingly employs incremental acquisition to help manage the risks of complex
procurements. Consequently, there is a need to provide visualizations of the evolving
capabilities so that Portfolio Managers can synchronize the introduction of capability
increments across a portfolio of projects. The Capability Models included within DoDAF are
based on the program and capability information used by Portfolio Managers to capture the
increasingly complex relationships between interdependent projects and capabilities.
Another justification for the Capability Viewpoint is the increasing importance of
transformational programs within the DoD (e.g., Global Exchange [GEX], Defense Acquisition
Initiative [DAI]). These types of programs are focused on the delivery of capabilities and do
not conform to the standard for project management and tend to be benefit-driven rather
than capability delivery focused. An ability to view these transformational programs, and
their interdependencies, provides a potentially powerful tool for DoD Enterprise Architects.
Capability Model Descriptions
Model Description
CV-1: Vision Describes a Project's Visions, Goals, Objectives, Plans,
Activities, Events, Conditions, Measures, Effects
(Outcomes), and produced objects.
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy An architectural data repository with definitions of all
terms used throughout the architectural data and
presentations.
CV-3: Capability Phasing The planned achievement of capability at different
points in time or during specific periods of time. The
CV-3 shows the capability phasing in terms of the
activities, conditions, desired effects, rules complied
with, resource consumption and production, and
measures, without regard to the performer and
location solutions
CV-4: Capability Dependencies The dependencies between planned capabilities and
the definition of logical groupings of capabilities.
CV-5: Capability to
Organizational Development
Mapping
The fulfillment of capability requirements shows the
planned capability deployment and interconnection for
a particular Capability Phase. The CV-5 shows the
planned solution for the phase in terms of performers
and locations and their associated concepts.
CV-6: Capability to Operational
Activities Mapping
A mapping between the capabilities required and the
operational activities that those capabilities support.
CV-7: Capability to Services
Mapping
A mapping between the capabilities and the services
that these capabilities enable.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
115
=== page 116 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Capability Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/capability.html[3/3/2011 3:37:17 PM]
 
Mappings of
 the Capability Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models to the DM2 Concepts,
Associations, and Attributes are in DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes Mapping
to DoDAF-described Models . The DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes are
described in the DoDAF Meta-model Data Dictionary .
The Capability Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models are discussed with examples in the DoDAF
Product Development Questionnaire Analysis Report.
Use of Capability Viewpoint Models . The CV DoDAF-described Models are intended to
provide support to various decision processes within the Department, one of which is
portfolio management. Since the DoD has moved toward the delivery of capabilities, these
models take on a more important role. Developing an architecture that includes the
relationships necessary to enable a capability thread is essential to improving usability of
architectures, as well as increasing the value of federation.
In the above context, a capability thread is similar to the result of a query that would be run
on a particular capability. For example, if an architecture were to include operational
activities, rules, and systems, a capability thread would equate to the specific activities,
rules, and systems that are linked to that particular capability. The CV DoDAF-described
Models are used to provide the strategic perspective and context for other architectural
information.
The concept of capability, as defined by its Meta-model Data Group allows one to answer
questions such as:
How does a particular capability or capabilities support the overall mission/vision?
What outcomes are expected to be achieved by a particular capability or set of
capabilities?
What services are required to support a capability?
What is the functional scope and organizational span of a capability or set of
capabilities?
What is our current set of capabilities that we are managing as part of a portfolio?
 
CV-1: Vision
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
CV-3: Capability Phasing
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
116
=== page 117 ===
DoDAF - Viewpoints CV-1: Vision
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:44:04 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Capability Viewpoint - Capability Model Descriptions
CV-1: Vision
The CV-1 addresses the enterprise concerns associated with the overall vision for
transformational endeavors and thus defines the strategic context for a group of capabilities.
The purpose of a CV-1 is to provide a strategic context for the capabilities described in the
Architectural Description. It also provides a high-level scope for the Architectural Description
which is more general than the scenario-based scope defined in an OV-1.
The intended usage is communication of the strategic vision regarding capability
development.
Detailed Description:
The CV-1 defines the strategic context for a group of capabilities described in the
Architectural Description by outlining the vision for a capability area over a bounded period
of time. It describes how high-level goals and strategy are to be delivered in capability
terms. A CV-1 may provide the blueprint for a transformational initiative. The CV-1 may be
primarily textual descriptions of the overarching objectives of the transformation or change
program that the Enterprise is engaged in. Of key importance is the identification of Goals,
together with the desired outcomes and measurable benefits associated with these.
CV-1: Vision
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
CV-3: Capability Phasing
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
 
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
117
=== page 118 ===
DoDAF - Viewpoints CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:07 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Capability Viewpoint - Capability Model Descriptions
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
The CV-2 captures capability taxonomies. The model presents a hierarchy of capabilities.
These capabilities may be presented in context of a timeline - i.e., it can show the required
capabilities for current and future capabilities. The CV-2 specifies all the capabilities that are
referenced throughout one or more architectures. In addition, it can be used as a source
document for the development of high-level use cases and user requirements.
The intended usage of the CV-2 includes:
Identification of capability requirements.
Capability planning (capability taxonomy).
Codifying required capability elements.
Capability audit.
Capability gap analysis.
Source for the derivation of cohesive sets of user requirements.
Providing reference capabilities for architectures.
In CV-2, the Capabilities are only described in the abstract - i.e., CV-2 does not specify how
a capability is to be implemented. A CV-2 is structured as a hierarchy of capabilities, with
the most general at the root and most specific at the leaves. At the leaf-level, capabilities
may have a measure specified, along with an environmental condition for the measure.
When capabilities are referenced in operational or systems architectures, it may be that a
particular facility, location, or organization or configuration meets more than one level of
capability. The CV-2 is used to capture and organize the capability functions - required for
the vision set out in the CV-1 Vision.
In contrast to AV-2 Integrated Dictionary, a CV-2 is structured using only one type of
specialization relationship between elements: sub-supertype. A sub-supertype relationship is
a relationship between two classes with the second being a pure specialization of the first.
In DoDAF V2.0, capabilities exist in space and over time, that is they are intended to provide
a framework across the lifetime of the enterprise that is being modeled. This means that it is
feasible to develop a capability taxonomy that can apply to all architecture phases.
In addition to the capability nomenclature, appropriate quantitative attributes and measures
for that specific capability or function need to be included e.g., the required speed of
processing, the rate of advance, the maximum detection range, etc. These attributes and
measures will remain associated with the capability whenever it is used across the
Architectural Description. The quantitative values expressed may be linked to specific phases
(or be "As-Is" values and/or or "To-Be" targets).
The CV-2 has no mandated structure although the architectural data must be able to support
the representation of a structured/hierarchal list. This structure may be delivered using
textual, tabular or graphical methods. The associated attributes and measures for each
capability can either be included on the main CV-2 or in tabular format as an appendix if the
inclusion of the attributes and measures would over complicate the presentation of the
populated view.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
118
=== page 119 ===
DoDAF - Viewpoints CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:07 PM]
CV-1: Vision
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
CV-3: Capability Phasing
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
119
=== page 120 ===
CV-3: Capability Phasing
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:44:10 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Capability Viewpoint - Capability Model Descriptions
CV-3: Capability Phasing
The CV-3 addresses the planned achievement of capability at different points in time or
during specific periods of time, i.e., capability phasing. The CV-3 supports the capability
audit processes and similar processes used across the different COIs by providing a method
to identify gaps or duplication in capability provision. The CV-3 indicates capability
increments, which should be associated with delivery milestones within acquisition projects
(when the increments are associated with capability deliveries).
The intended usage of the CV-3 includes:
Capability planning (capability phasing).
Capability integration planning.
Capability gap analysis.
Detailed Description:
The CV-3 provides a representation of the available capability at different points in time or
during specific periods of time (associated with the phases - see CV-1 Vision model). A CV-3
can be used to assist in the identification of capability gaps/shortfalls (no fielded capability
to fulfill a particular capability function) or capability duplication/overlap (multiple fielded
capabilities for a single capability function).
The CV-3 is populated by analyzing programmatic project data to determine when projects
providing elements of capability are to be delivered, upgraded and/or withdrawn (this data
may be provided in part by a PV-2 Project Timelines model). Then capability increments
identified can be structured according to the required capabilities determined in the CV-2
Capability Taxonomy model and the phases. Alternatively, a set of desired capability
increments can be viewed and then compared to the project plans. In practice, the
population of the model tends to iterate between considering the desired capability and
considering what capability is planned to be delivered. The output from this iterative
approach can be a table that represents the required capability phasing.
The CV-3 can be presented as a table consisting of rows representing Capabilities (derived
from the CV-2 Capability Taxonomy model) and columns representing phases (from CV-1
Vision model).
At each row-column intersection in the CV-3 table, the capability increment that represents
the change in Capability within that phase can be displayed. If the availability of the
Capability spans multiple periods of time, then this can be indicated by an elongated color-
coded bar. If there are no Capabilities planned to satisfy the Capability Requirements in that
period of time then a blank space can be left.
A variant CV-3, in which the names of the projects that can deliver the capability increments
are included, can identify capability gaps and shortfalls. The essence is the relationship
between projects, capabilities and time. The model may be used to envisage the need for
interventions in projects (to fulfill a capability gap) or to represent current plans (the
availability of capability according to their delivery timescales).
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
120
=== page 121 ===
CV-3: Capability Phasing
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:44:10 PM]
CV-1: Vision
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
CV-3: Capability Phasing
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
121
=== page 122 ===
DoDAF - Viewpoints CV-4: Capability Dependencies
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-4.html[3/3/2011 3:44:13 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Capability Viewpoint - Capability Model Descriptions
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
The CV-4 describes the dependencies between planned capabilities. It also defines logical
groupings of capabilities.
The CV-4 is intended to provide a means of analyzing the dependencies between
capabilities. The groupings of capabilities are logical, and the purpose of the groupings is to
guide enterprise management. In particular, the dependencies and groupings may suggest
specific interactions between acquisition projects to achieve the overall capability.
The intended usage of the CV-4 includes:
Identification of capability dependencies.
Capability management (impact analysis for options, disposal etc.).
Detailed Description:
The CV-4 describes the relationships between capabilities. It also defines logical groupings of
capabilities. This contrasts with CV-2 Capability Taxonomy model which also deals with
relationships between Capabilities; but CV-2 only addresses specialization-generalization
relationship (i.e., capability taxonomy).
A CV-4 shows the capabilities that are of interest to the Architectural Description. It groups
those capabilities into logical groupings, based on the need for those elements to be
integrated.
An approach for describing a CV-4 is graphical. In some cases, it may be important to
distinguish between different types of dependency in the CV-4. Graphically, this can be
achieved by color-coding the connecting lines or by using dashed lines. From a data
perspective, the CV-4 can make use pre-existing capability dependency types in the DoDAF
Meta-model; else new, specific dependency types can be created. The new dependency
types need to be recorded the in the AV-2: Integrated Dictionary.
CV-1: Vision
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
CV-3: Capability Phasing
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
122
=== page 123 ===
DoDAF - Viewpoints CV-4: Capability Dependencies
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-4.html[3/3/2011 3:44:13 PM]
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
123
=== page 124 ===
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-5.html[3/3/2011 3:44:15 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Capability Viewpoint - Capability Model Descriptions
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
The CV-5 addresses the fulfillment of capability requirements.
This model shows the planned capability deployment and interconnection for a particular
phase. and should provide a more detailed dependency analysis than is possible using the
CV-3 Capability Phasing model. The CV-5 is used to support the capability management
process and, in particular, assist the planning of fielding.
The intended usage of the CV-5 includes:
Fielding planning.
Capability integration planning.
Capability options analysis.
Capability redundancy/overlap/gap analysis.
Identification of deployment level shortfalls.
Detailed Description:
The CV-5 shows deployment of Capabilities to specific organizations. CV-5 models are
specific to a phase. If a particular Capability is/was used by (or is due to be used by) a
specific organization during that phase, it should be shown on the CV-5, mapped to the
organization. The CV-5 may also show interactions between them (where these have been
previously defined in a SV-1 Systems Interface Description or SvcV-1 Services Context
Description). The CV-5, along with SV-8 Systems Evolution Description, SvcV-8 Services
Evolution Description and PV-2 Project Timelines models can be regarded as amplifying the
information contained in the CV-3.
To conduct a comprehensive analysis, several CV-5s can be created to represent the
different phases. Although the CV-5s are represented separately, Capabilities may exist in
more than one model. The information used to create the CV-5 is drawn from other DoDAF-
described Models (PV-2 Project Timelines, CV-2 Capability Taxonomy, OV-4 Organizational
Relationships Chart, SV-1 Systems Interface Description, SvcV-1 Services Context
Description), and the timing is based on PV-2 Project Timelines indicating delivery of
Capabilities to actual organizational resources, and also the point at which those
organizational resources cease to use a particular Capability.
System interaction (from the SV-1 Systems Interface Description) or Service interaction
(from the SvcV-1 Services Context Description) can be shown on a CV-5. In addition, where
a Capability or resources is deployed across a number of Organizations, a parent
Organization can be created for context purposes, and the Capability or resource stretched
across the domain of the parent Organization.
The architect should not overwhelm the diagram with capabilities and organizations. A CV-5
should be seen as a summary of the delivery schedules for capabilities (hence it could be
argued that it belongs in the PV Viewpoint). To prevent constraining the solution space, CV-5
should not be produced at the time of developing capability/user requirements, but after the
solution is determined. Instead, the CV-5 should be more of an informative from a
programmatic standpoint.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
124
=== page 125 ===
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-5.html[3/3/2011 3:44:15 PM]
The CV-5 is usually based on a tabular representation, with the appropriate Organizational
structure represented by one axis, and the capabilities by the other axis. Graphical objects
representing Capabilities or resources can be placed in the relevant positions (intersections)
relative to these axes.
CV-1: Vision
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
CV-3: Capability Phasing
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
125
=== page 126 ===
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-6.html[3/3/2011 3:44:30 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Capability Viewpoint - Capability Model Descriptions
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
The CV-6 describes the mapping between the capabilities required and the activities that
enable those capabilities.
It is important to ensure that the operational activity matches the required capability. The
CV-6 DoDAF-described Model provides a bridge between capability analyzed using CVs and
operational activities analyzed using OVs. Specifically, it identifies how operational activities
can be performed using various available capability elements. It is similar in function to the
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix. The capability to activity
mappings may include both situations where activities fully satisfy the desired capability and
those where the activity only partially meets the capability requirement.
The intended usage of the CV-6 includes:
Tracing capability requirements to operational activities.
Capability audit.
Detailed Description:
A CV-6 shows which elements of capability may be utilized in support of specific operational
activities by means of a mapping matrix. If the CV-6 is created as part of a strategic
architecture (i.e., before the creation of supporting operational models), it is recommended
that the operational activities described in the CV-6 should be common functions. This model
may be used indicate that an operational capability (perhaps reflecting a particular user
requirement) does or does not fulfill the requirements for capability for a particular phase.
In principle, there could be a different CV-6 created for each phase of the capability
development, or perhaps for different capability phasing scenarios. In most cases, it is
considered that a single table can be constructed because the operational activities that are
most likely relevant to this model may be relatively high-level. If capabilities associated are
generic (see CV-1 Vision model), then they should have a well understood relationship with
a standard set of operational activities and this relationship is unlikely to change over time.
This model is analogous to the SV-5a Operational Activity to System Function Traceability
Matrix - but provides the interface between Capability and Operational Models rather than
Operational to System Models.
The CV-6 can have a tabular presentation. The rows can be the Capabilities and the columns
can be the Operational Activities. An X may indicate that the capability may be utilized in
support of that activity whereas a blank indicates that it does not. Alternatively, a date or
phase can indicate that the capability may support that activity by the date or phase
indicated.
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping . The CV-7 describes the mapping between the
capabilities required and the services that enable those capabilities. It is important to ensure
that
CV-1: Vision
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
Background
What is New in DoDAF V2.0
VisioBackground
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
126
=== page 127 ===
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-6.html[3/3/2011 3:44:30 PM]
CV-3: Capability Phasing
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
127
=== page 128 ===
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-7.html[3/3/2011 3:44:32 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Capability Viewpoint - Capability Model Descriptions
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
The CV-7 describes the mapping between the capabilities required and the services that
enable those capabilities. It is important to ensure that the services match the required
capability. The CV-7 provides a bridge between capability analyzed using CVs and services
analyzed using SvcVs. Specifically, it identifies how services can be performed using various
available capability elements. It is similar in function to the SV-5a which maps system
functions to operational activities. The capability to service mappings may include both
situations where a service fully satisfies the desired capability and those where the service
only partially meets the capability requirement.
The intended usage of the CV-7 includes:
Tracing capability requirements to services.
Capability audit.
Detailed Description:
The CV-7 describes the mapping between capabilities required and the services that those
capabilities support. A CV-7 shows which elements of capability may be utilized in support of
specific services by means of a mapping matrix. If the CV-7 is created as part of a strategic
architecture (i.e., before the creation of supporting service models), it is recommended that
the services used as part of the CV-7 are common functions. This model may be used
indicate that an operational capability (perhaps reflecting a particular user requirement) does
or does not fulfill the requirements for capability for a particular phase.
In principle, there could be a different CV-7 created for each phase of the capability
development, or perhaps for different capability phasing scenarios. In most cases, it is
considered that a single table can be constructed because the services that are most likely
relevant to this model may be relatively high-level. If capabilities associated are generic (see
CV-1 Vision model), then they should have a well understood relationship with a standard
set of services and this relationship is unlikely to change over time.
This model is analogous to the SV-5a Operational Activity to System Function Traceability
Matrix - but provides the interface between Capability and Service Models rather than
Operational to System Models.
The CV-7 can have a tabular presentation. The rows can be the Capabilities and the columns
can be the services. An X indicates that the capability may be utilized in support of that
service whereas a blank indicates that it does not. Alternatively, a date or phase can indicate
that the capability may support that service by the date or phase indicated.
CV-1: Vision
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy
CV-3: Capability Phasing
CV-4: Capability Dependencies
CV-5: Capability to Organizational Development Mapping
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
128
=== page 129 ===
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CV-7.html[3/3/2011 3:44:32 PM]
CV-6: Capability to Operational Activities Mapping
CV-7: Capability to Services Mapping
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
129
=== page 130 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Data and Information Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/data.html[3/3/2011 3:37:21 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Data and Information Viewpoint
DoDAF-described Models within the Data and Information Viewpoint provide a means of
portraying the operational and business information requirements and rules that are
managed within and used as constraints on the organizations business activities. Experience
gained from many enterprise architecture efforts within the DoD led to the identification of
several levels of abstraction necessary to accurately communicate the information needs of
an organization or enterprise. The appropriate level or levels of abstraction for a given
architecture are dependent on the use and the intended users of the architecture. Where
appropriate, the data captured in this viewpoint needs to be considered by COIs.
DoDAF V2.0 incorporates three levels of abstraction that correlate to the different levels
associated with most data models developed in support of the operations or business. These
levels are:
Conceptual.
Logical.
Physical.
Data and Information Model Descriptions
Model Description
DIV-1: Conceptual Data Model The required high-level data concepts and their
relationships.
DIV-2: Logical Data Model The documentation of the data requirements and
structural business process (activity) rules. In DoDAF
V1.5, this was the OV-7.
DIV-3: Physical Data Model The physical implementation format of the Logical Data
Model entities, e.g., message formats, file structures,
physical schema. In DoDAF V1.5, this was the SV-11.
 
Mappings of
 the Data and Information Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models to the DM2
Concepts, Associations, and Attributes are in DM2 Concepts, Associations, and
Attributes Mapping to DoDAF-described Models . There is traceability between the DIV-
1 to the DIV-2 to the DIV3 as follows:
The information representations in the DIV-1 are same, decomposed into, or factored
into the data representations in the DIV-2. The DIV-1 information representations can
range in detail from concept lists to structured lists (i.e., whole-part, super-subtype),
to inter-related concepts. At the DIV-1 level, any relationships are simply declared
and then at the DIV-2 level they are made explicit and attributed. Similarly, attributes
(or additional relationships) are added at the DIV-2 level.
The DIV-3's performance and implementation considerations usually result in
standard modifications of the DIV-2 and so it traces quite directly. That is, no new
semantics are introduced going from the DIV-2 to the DIV-3.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
130
=== page 131 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Data and Information Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/data.html[3/3/2011 3:37:21 PM]
The DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes are described in the DoDAF Meta-model
Data Dictionary.
Uses of Data and Information Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models.  The DIV DoDAF-
described Models provide means of ensuring that only those information items that are
important to the organization's operations and business are managed as part of the
enterprise. They are also useful foundations for discussion with the various stakeholders of
the architecture (e.g., decision-makers, architects, developers). These stakeholders require
varying levels of detail to support their roles within the enterprise.
When building an architecture using a structured analysis approach, the items captured as
part of the data model can be derived from the inputs and outputs associated to the
organizations activities. Building the data model in this manner ties the data being managed
within the architecture to the activities that necessitate that data. This provides a valuable
construct enabling the information to be traceable to the strategic drivers of the
architecture. This also enables the data to be used to map services and systems to the
business operations. The conceptual data model would be a good tool to use when discussing
this traceability with executive decision-makers and persons at that level.
The logical data model bridges the gap between the conceptual and physical-levels. The
logical data model introduces attributes and structural rules that form the data structure. As
evidenced by the content, this model provides more detail than the conceptual model and
communicates more to the architects and systems analysts types of stakeholders. This is one
model that helps bridge the gap between architecture and system development. It provides
a valuable tool for generating requirements and test scripts against which services and
systems can be tested.
Lastly, the physical data model is the actual data schema representative of the database that
provides data to the services and applications using the data. This schema is usually a de-
normalized data structure optimized to meet performance parameters. The physical data
model usually can be generated from a well-defined logical data model then used by
database developers and system developers or it can be developed separately from the
logical data model (not the optimum method of development) and optimized by the database
and system developers. This model can be used to develop XML message sets and other
physical exchange specifications enabling the exchange of architecture information.
Metadata Groups Used to Create Data and Information Models . The previous DoDAF-
described Models focused on particular areas within the DoDAF Meta-model from which the
majority of the information within the models can be extracted. For example, the Capability
Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models are in large part made up of data extracted from the
Capability Metadata groups. The same is true for Project, Services and the like. The Data
and Information DoDAF-described Models are somewhat different.
The Data and Information DoDAF-described Models contain information extracted from all of
the metadata groups. Therefore, any information that an organization is managing using its
enterprise architecture, should be captured within the Data and Information Models. As
previously stated, there are levels of detail that are not included in all models (e.g., the
conceptual data model is usually not fully attributed like the logical and physical) but the
information item itself (e.g., capability, activity, service) should be represented in all models.
Together, the three types of models help bridge the gap between architecture being used as
requirements and architecture being used to support system engineering.
DIV-1: Conceptual Data Model
DIV-2: Logical Data Model
DIV-3: Physical Data Model
 
Go to top of page ↑
131
=== page 132 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Data and Information Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/data.html[3/3/2011 3:37:21 PM]
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
132
=== page 133 ===
DIV-1: Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DIV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:44:36 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Data and Information Viewpoint
DIV-1: Conceptual Data Model
The DIV-1, a new DoDAF-described Model in DoDAF V2.0, addresses the information
concepts at a high-level on an operational architecture.
The DIV-1 is used to document the business information requirements and structural
business process rules of the architecture. It describes the information that is associated
with the information of the architecture. Included are information items, their attributes or
characteristics, and their inter-relationships.
The intended usage of the DIV-1 includes:
Information requirements
Information hierarchy
Detailed Description:
The DIV-1 DoDAF-described Model describes the structure of an Architectural Description
domain's information types and the structural business process rules (defined in the OV
Models).
The Architectural elements for DIV-1 include descriptions of information entity and
relationship types. Attributes can be associated with entities and with relationships,
depending on the purposes of the Architectural Description.
The intention is that DIV-1 describes information or data of importance to the business
(e.g., information products that might be referred to in doctrine, SOPs, etc.) whereas the
DIV-3 Physical Data Model describes data relevant at the system-level.
The purpose of a given Architectural Description helps to determine the level of detail
needed in this model. This level of detail is driven in particular by the criticality of the
interoperability requirements.
Often, different organizations may use the same Entity name to mean very different kinds of
information having different internal structure. This situation could pose significant
interoperability risks, as the information models may appear to be compatible, e.g., each
having a Target Track data Entity, but having different and incompatible interpretations of
what Target Track means.
A DIV-1 may be necessary for interoperability when shared information syntax and
semantics form the basis for greater degrees of information systems interoperability, or
when an information repository is the basis for integration and interoperability among
business activities and between capabilities.
The DIV-1 defines the Architectural Description's information classes and the relationships
among them. For example, if the architecture effort is describing missile defense, some
possible information classes may be trajectory and target with a relationship that associates
a target with a certain trajectory. The DIV-1 defines each kind of information classes
associated with the Architectural Description scope, mission, or business as its own Entity,
with its associated attributes and relationships. These Entity definitions correlate to OV-2
Operational Resource Flow Description information elements and OV-5b Operational Activity
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
133
=== page 134 ===
DIV-1: Conceptual Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DIV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:44:36 PM]
Model inputs, outputs, and controls.
The DIV-1 should not be confused with the DoDAF Meta-model. Architectural data types for
the DoDAF (i.e., DoDAF-defined architectural data elements and DM2 entities) are things like
Performer and Operational Activity. The DM2 does provide a specification of the underlying
semantics for DoDAF-described Models such as DIV-1. DIV-1 describes information about a
specific Architectural Description scope.
DIV-1: Conceptual Data Model
DIV-2: Logical Data Model
DIV-3: Physical Data Model
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
134
=== page 135 ===
DIV-2: Logical Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DIV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:39 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Data and Information Viewpoint
DIV-2: Logical Data Model
The DIV-2 allows analysis of an architecture's data definition aspect, without consideration of
implementation specific or product specific issues.
Another purpose is to provide a common dictionary of data definitions to consistently
express models wherever logical-level data elements are included in the descriptions. Data
definitions in other models include:
Data described in a DIV-2 may be related to Information in an OV-1 High Level
Operational Concept Graphic or and Activity Resource (where the Resource is Data)
flow object in an OV-5b Operational Activity Model. This relation may be a simple
subtype, where the Data is a proceduralized (structured) way of describing something.
Recall that Information describes something. Alternatively, the relation may be
complex using Information and Data whole-part (and overlap) relationships.
The DIV-2 information entities and elements can be constrained and validated by the
capture of business requirements in the OV-6a Operational Rules Model.
The information entities and elements modeled in the DIV-2 also capture the
information content of messages that connect life-lines in an OV-6c Event-Trace
Description.
The DIV-2 may capture elements required due to Standards in the StdV-1 Standards
Profile or StdV-2 Standards Forecast.
Detailed Description:
The DIV-2 is a generalized formal structure in computer science. It directly reflects the
paradigm or theory oriented mapping from the DIV-1 Conceptual Data Model to the DIV-2.
Possible Construction Methods: DoDAF does not endorse a specific data modeling
methodology. The appropriate way to develop a logical data model depends on the
technology chosen as the main design solution (e.g., relational theory or object-orientation).
For relational theory, a logical data model seems best described using an entity relationship
diagramming technique. For Object-Oriented, a logical data model seems best described
using Class and/or Object diagrams.
In either case, attention should be given to quality characteristics for the data model.
Definition and acceptance of data model quality measures (not data quality measures) for
logical data models are sparse. There is some research and best practices. Framed as a
software verification, validation, and quality factors, types of best practices include:
Validation Factors - Was the Right Model Built?
Information Requirements Fidelity.
Conceptual, Logical, and Physical Traceability.
Adherence to Government and Industry Standards and Best Practices.
Domain Values.
Resource Exchange and Other Interoperability Requirements.
Net-Centric Factors.
- XML Registration. 
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
135
=== page 136 ===
DIV-2: Logical Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DIV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:39 PM]
- COI Participation. 
- DDMS Compatibility.
Identifiers and Labels.
Verification Factors - Was it Well Built?
Design Factors.
Compactness.
Abstraction and Generalization.
Ontologic Foundations.
Semantic Purity.
Logical and Physical Redundancy.
Separation of Concerns.
Software Quality Factors.
Documentation.
Naming Conventions.
Naming and Business Languages.
Definitions.
Completeness.
Consistency.
Implementability.
Enumerations/free text ratio.
An example design factor is normalization- essentially one representation for any particular
real-world object. There are degrees of normalization with third normal form (3NF) being
commonly used. At 3NF, there are no repeating attributes; instead techniques like lookup
tables, super-subtyping to carry the common attributes at the supertype-level, and entity
decomposition into smaller attribute groupings are used. For the DIV-2, care should be taken
to avoid hidden overlaps, where there is a semantic overlap between concepts with different
entity, attribute, or domain value names.
DIV-1: Conceptual Data Model
DIV-2: Logical Data Model
DIV-3: Physical Data Model
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
136
=== page 137 ===
DIV-3: Physical Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DIV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:44:41 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Data and Information Viewpoint
DIV-3: Physical Data Model
The DIV-3 defines the structure of the various kinds of system or service data that are
utilized by the systems or services in the Architectural Description. The Physical Schema is
one of the models closest to actual system design in DoDAF. DIV-3 is used to describe how
the information represented in the DIV-2 Logical Data Model is actually implemented.
While the mapping between the logical and physical data models is relatively
straightforward, the relationship between the components of each model (e.g., entity types
in the logical model versus relational tables in the physical model) is frequently one-to-many
or many-to-many.
The intended usage of the DIV-3 includes:
Specifying the system/service data elements exchanged between systems and/or
services, thus reducing the risk of interoperability errors.
Definition of physical data structure.
Providing as much detail as possible on data elements exchanged between systems,
thus reducing the risk of interoperability problems.
Providing data structures for use in the system design process, if necessary.
Providing a common dictionary of data implementation elements (e.g., tables and
records in a relational database schema) to consistently express models wherever
physical-level data elements are included in the descriptions.
Providing as much detail as possible on the system or service data elements
exchanged between systems, thus reducing the risk of interfacing errors.
Providing system and service data structures for use in the system and service design
process, if necessary.
Note that DoDAF talks about information in the Operational Viewpoint and data in the
System Viewpoint or Services Viewpoint. The intention of this distinction is that DIV-2
Logical Data Model describes information of importance to the business, (e.g., information
products that might be referred to in doctrine, SOPs etc.) whereas DIV-3 describes data
relevant at the system or service-level.
Detailed Description:
The DIV-3 is an implementation-oriented model that is used in the Systems Viewpoint and
Services Viewpoint to describe how the information requirements represented in DIV-2
Logical Data Model are actually implemented. Entities represent:
System Resource flows in SV-4 Systems Functionality Description.
System Resource elements specified in SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix and SV-
10c Systems Event-Trace Description.
Service Resource flows in SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description.
Service Resource elements specified in SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix and
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description.
Triggering events in SV-10b Systems State Transition Description or SvcV-10b
Services State Transition Description.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
137
=== page 138 ===
DIV-3: Physical Data Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/DIV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:44:41 PM]
Events in SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description or SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace
Description.
Elements required due to Standards in the StdV-1 Standards Profile or StdV-2
Standards Forecast.
For some purposes, an Entity relationship style diagram of the physical database design is
sufficient. References to message format standards may be sufficient for message-oriented
implementations. Descriptions of file formats may be used when file passing is the model
used to exchange information. Interoperating systems may use a variety of techniques to
exchange system data and have several distinct partitions in their DIV-3 with each partition
using a different form.
Standards associated with entities are also often identified in the development of the DIV-3;
these should be recorded in the StdV-1 Standards Profile. Structural Assertions - these
involve static aspects of business rules - are best captured in the DIV-3.
Possible Construction Methods: DoDAF does not endorse a specific data modeling
methodology. The physical data schema model specifies how the logical data model will be
instantiated. The most predominant are the relational database management systems and
object repository products. In addition, this model may employ other technology
mechanisms, such as messages or flat files. The essential elements of a physical data
schema model (in the case of a relational database) are: tables, records and keys. In an
object-oriented data model, all data elements are expressed as objects; whether they are
classes, instances, attributes, relationships, or events.
The appropriate way to develop a physical data model depends on the product chosen to
instantiate the logical data model (e.g., a relational database management system
[RDBMS]). A physical data schema model seems best described using an entity-relationship
diagramming technique. For Object-Oriented data modeling, a physical data schema seems
best described using by Class and/or Object diagrams. For other implementation
technologies, such as message orientation, a reference to a message format standard might
be more appropriate.
DIV-1: Conceptual Data Model
DIV-2: Logical Data Model
DIV-3: Physical Data Model
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
138
=== page 139 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Operational Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/operational.html[3/3/2011 3:37:25 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
DoDAF-described Models in the Operational Viewpoint describe the tasks and activities,
operational elements, and resource flow exchanges required to conduct operations. A pure
operational model is materiel independent. However, operations and their relationships may
be influenced by new technologies, such as collaboration technology, where process
improvements are in practice before policy can reflect the new procedures. There may be
some cases, as well, in which it is necessary to document the way activities are performed,
given the restrictions of current systems, to examine ways in which new systems could
facilitate streamlining the activities. In such cases, operational models may have materiel
constraints and requirements that need to be addressed. For this reason, it may be
necessary to include some high-level system architectural data to augment information onto
the operational models.
Uses of Operational Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models . The OV DoDAF-described
Models may be used to describe a requirement for a “To-Be” architecture in logical terms, or
as a simplified description of the key behavioral and information aspects of an “As-Is”
architecture. The OV DoDAF-described Models re-use the capabilities defined in the
Capability Viewpoint and put them in the context of an operation or scenario. The OV
DoDAF-described Models can be used in a number of ways, including the development of
user requirements, capturing future concepts, and supporting operational planning
processes.
One important way that architectural modeling supports the definition of requirements is in
terms of boundary definition. Boundary definition is a process that often requires a
significant degree of stakeholder engagement; the described models provided by DoDAF
provide ideal support for this interactive process. The DoDAF provides support to the concept
of functional scope and organizational span. When performing analysis of requirements
relative to a particular capability or capabilities, it is important to know the specific
functionality intended to be delivered by the capability. It is also important to know the
limits of that functionality, to be able to determine necessary interfaces to other capabilities
and organizations. The use of OV DoDAF-described Models (e.g., Operational Resource Flow
Description and Operational Activity Model) supports identification of the boundaries of
capabilities, thus rendering the functional scope and organizational span.
Definition of user-level interoperability requirements is another use for which there is
applicability of the Operational Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models. Within the Operational
Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models, DoDAF supports interoperability analysis in a number of
ways.
Operational models can be used to help answering questions such as:
What are the lines of business supported by this enterprise?
What activities are in place to support the different lines of business?
What is the functional scope of the capability or capabilities for which I am
responsible? This can be answered by a combination of information from the activity
model and CV DoDAF-described Models.
What is the organizational span of influence of this capability or capabilities?
What information must be passed between capabilities?
What strategic drivers require that certain data are passed or tracked? This can be
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
139
=== page 140 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Operational Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/operational.html[3/3/2011 3:37:25 PM]
answered by a combination of data within the logical data model, information
exchanges, activities, and CV DoDAF-described Models.
What activities are being supported or automated by a capability or capabilities?
What role does organization X play within a capability or capabilities?
What are the functional requirements driving a particular capability?
What rules are applied within a capability, and how are they applied?
Use of Operational Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models should improve the quality of
requirements definitions by:
Explicitly tying user requirements to strategic-level capability needs, enabling early
agreement to be reached on the capability boundary.
Providing a validated reference model of the business/operations against which the
completeness of a requirements definition can be assessed (visualization aids
validation).
Explicitly linking functional requirements to a validated model of the business or
operations activities.
Capturing information-related requirements (not just Information Exchange
Requirements [IERs]) in a coherent manner and in a way that really reflects the user
collaboration needs.
Providing a basis for test scenarios linked to user requirements.
Capturing the activities for Process Engineering or Process Re-engineering.
Operational Model Descriptions
Model Description
OV-1: High-Level Operational
Concept Graphic
The high-level graphical/textual description of the
operational concept.
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow
Description
A description of the Resource Flows exchanged
between operational activities.
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow
Matrix
A description of the resources exchanged and the
relevant attributes of the exchanges.
OV-4: Organizational Relationships
Chart
The organizational context, role or other
relationships among organizations.
OV-5a: Operational Activity
Decomposition Tree
The capabilities and activities (operational
activities) organized in a hierarchal structure.
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model The context of capabilities and activities
(operational activities) and their relationships
among activities, inputs, and outputs; Additional
data can show cost, performers or other pertinent
information.
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model One of three models used to describe activity
(operational activity). It identifies business rules
that constrain operations.
OV-6b: State Transition Description One of three models used to describe operational
activity (activity). It identifies business process
(activity) responses to events (usually, very short
activities).
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description One of three models used to describe activity
(operational activity). It traces actions in a scenario
or sequence of events.
140
=== page 141 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Operational Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/operational.html[3/3/2011 3:37:25 PM]
 
Mappings of
 the Data and Information Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models to the DM2
Concepts, Associations, and Attributes are in DM2 Concepts, Associations, and
Attributes Mapping to DoDAF-described Models . The DM2 Concepts, Associations, and
Attributes are described in the DoDAF Meta-model Data Dictionary .
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
141
=== page 142 ===
OV-1: High Level Operational Concept Graphic
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:44:44 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
OV-1: High Level Operational Concept Graphic
The OV-1 describes a mission, class of mission, or scenario. It shows the main operational
concepts and interesting or unique aspects of operations. It describes the interactions
between the subject architecture and its environment, and between the architecture and
external systems. The OV-1 is the pictorial representation of the written content of the AV-1
Overview and Summary Information. Graphics alone are not sufficient for capturing the
necessary architectural data.
The OV-1 provides a graphical depiction of what the architecture is about and an idea of the
players and operations involved. An OV-1 can be used to orient and focus detailed
discussions. Its main use is to aid human communication, and it is intended for presentation
to high-level decision-makers.
The intended usage of the OV-1 includes:
Putting an operational situation or scenario into context.
Providing a tool for discussion and presentation; for example, aids industry
engagement in acquisition.
Providing an aggregate illustration of the details within the published high-level
organization of more detailed information in published architectures.
Detailed Description:
Each Operational Viewpoint relates to a specific point within the Enterprise's timeline. The
OV-1 describes a mission, class of mission, or scenario. The purpose of OV-1 is to provide a
quick, high-level description of what the architecture is supposed to do, and how it is
supposed to do it. An OV-1 can be used to orient and focus detailed discussions. Its main
utility is as a facilitator of human communication, and it is intended for presentation to high-
level decision-makers. An OV-1 identifies the mission/scope covered in the Architectural
Description. OV-1 conveys, in simple terms, what the Architectural Description is about and
an idea of the players and operations involved.
The content of an OV-1 depends on the scope and intent of the Architectural Description, but
in general it describes the business activities or missions, high-level operations,
organizations, and geographical distribution of assets. The model frames the operational
concept (what happens, who does what, in what order, to accomplish what goal) and
highlight interactions to the environment and other external systems. However, the content
is at an executive summary-level as other models allow for more detailed definition of
interactions and sequencing.
It may highlight the key Operational concepts and interesting or unique aspects of the
concepts of operations. It provides a description of the interactions between the Architectural
Description and its environment, and between the Architectural Description and external
systems. A textual description accompanying the graphic is crucial. Graphics alone are not
sufficient for capturing the necessary architectural data.
The OV-1 consists of a graphical executive summary for a given Architectural Description
with accompanying text.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
142
=== page 143 ===
OV-1: High Level Operational Concept Graphic
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:44:44 PM]
During the course of developing an Architectural Description, several versions of an OV-1
may be produced. An initial version may be produced to focus the effort and illustrate its
scope. After other models within the Architectural Description's scope have been developed
and verified, another version of the OV-1 may be produced to reflect adjustments to the
scope and other Architectural Description details that may have been identified as a result of
the architecture development. After the Architectural Description has been used for its
intended purpose and the appropriate analysis has been completed, yet another version may
be produced to summarize these findings to present them to high-level decision-makers. In
other cases, OV-1 is the last model to be developed, as it conveys summary information
about the whole Architectural Description for a given scenario.
The OV-1 is useful in establishing the context for a suite of related operational models. This
context may be in terms of phase, a time period, a mission and/or a location. In particular,
this provides a container for the spatial-temporally constrained performance parameters
(measures).
To describe this, the operational performance measures for desert warfare in Phase 1 may be
different to those in Phase 2. The measures for jungle warfare in Phase 2 may be different to
those for desert warfare in Phase 2.
The context may also explicitly involve a Mission. When the subject of the Architectural
Description is a business capability rather than a battlespace capability, then some
adjustment is needed in the use of terminology. However, the idea of having a high-level
(Business) operational concept still makes sense and the graphical representation in OV-1
adds value to the more structured models that may be created.
OV-1 is the most general of the architectural models and the most flexible in format.
However, an OV-1 usually consists of one or more graphics (or possibly a video-clip), as
needed, as well as explanatory text.
OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept Graphic
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
OV-6a, 6b, 6c: Introduction
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
OV-6b: State Transition Description
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
143
=== page 144 ===
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:47 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
The OV-2 DoDAF-described Model applies the context of the operational capability to a
community of anticipated users. The primary purpose of the OV-2 is to define capability
requirements within an operational context. The OV-2 may also be used to express a
capability boundary.
New to DoDAF V2.0, the OV-2 can be used to show flows of funding, personnel and materiel
in addition to information. A specific application of the OV-2 is to describe a logical pattern
of resource (information, funding, personnel, or materiel) flows. The logical pattern need not
correspond to specific organizations, systems or locations, allowing Resource Flows to be
established without prescribing the way that the Resource Flows are handled and without
prescribing solutions.
The intended usage of the OV-2 includes:
Definition of operational concepts.
Elaboration of capability requirements.
Definition of collaboration needs.
Applying a local context to a capability.
Problem space definition.
Operational planning.
Supply chain analysis.
Allocation of activities to resources.
Detailed Description:
The OV-2 depicts Operational Needlines that indicate a need to exchange resources. New to
DoDAF V2.0, the OV-2 show flows of funding, personnel and materiel in addition to
information. The OV-2 may also show the location of Operational facilities or locations, and
may optionally be annotated to show flows of information, funding, people or materiel
between Operational Activities. The Operational Activities shown in an OV-2 may be internal
to the architecture, or may be external activities that communicate with those internal
activities.
Use of OV-2 is intended to be logical. It is to describe who or what, not how. This model
provides a focus for the operational requirements which may reflect any capability
requirements that have been articulated but within the range of operational settings that are
being used for operational architecture. In an "As-Is" architecture, an OV-2 may be used as
an abstract (i.e., simplified) representation of the Resource Flows taking place in the
Enterprise. An OV-2 can be a powerful way of expressing the differences between an "As-Is"
Architectural Description and a proposed "To-Be" Architectural Description to non-technical
stakeholders, as it simply shows how Resource Flows (or does not flow). The aim of the OV-
2 is to record the operational characteristics for the community of anticipated users relevant
to the Architectural Description and their collaboration needs, as expressed in Needlines and
Resource Flows.
A specific application of the OV-2 is to describe a logical pattern of resource (information,
funding, personnel, or materiel) flows. The purpose of an OV-2 model is to describe a logical
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
 
Department of Defense
144
=== page 145 ===
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:47 PM]
pattern of Resource Flows. The logical pattern need not correspond to specific organizations,
systems or locations, allowing Resource Flows to be established without prescribing the way
that the Resource Flows are handled and without prescribing solutions. The OV-2 is intended
to track the need for Resource Flows between specific Operational Activities and Locations
that play a key role in the Architectural Description. OV-2 does not depict the physical
connectivity between the Activities and Locations. The logical pattern established in an OV-2
model may act as the backbone onto which architectural elements may be overlaid - e.g., a
SV-1 Systems Interface Description model can show which systems are providing the
necessary capability.
The main features of this model are the Operational Resource Flows, and the location (or
type of location/environment) where the resources need to be or are deployed, and the
Needlines that indicate a need to exchange or share resources. An OV-2 indicates the key
players and the interactions necessary to conduct the corresponding operational activities of
OV-5a Operational Activity Decomposition Tree or OV-5b Operational Activity Model.
A Needline documents the required or actual exchanges of resources. A Needline is a conduit
for one or more resource exchanges - i.e., it represents a logical bundle of Resource Flows.
The Needline does not indicate how the transfer is implemented. For example, if information
(or funding, personnel, or materiel) is produced at location A, routed through location B, and
is used at location C, then location B would not be shown on the OV-2 - the Needline would
go from Location A to Location C. The OV-2 is not a communications link or communications
network diagram but a high-level definition of the logical requirement for resource exchange.
A OV-2 can also define a need to exchange items between Operational Activities and
locations and external resources (i.e., Operational Activities, Locations, or Organizations that
are not strictly within the scope of the subject Architectural Description but which interface
to it either as important sources of items required within the Architectural Description or
important destinations for items provided within the Architectural Description).
The OV-2 is intended to track the need to exchange items between key Operational
Activities and Locations within the Architectural Description. The OV-2 does not depict the
physical connectivity between the Operational Activities and Locations. The Needlines
established in an OV-2 can be realized by resources and their interactions in a SV-1 Systems
Interface Description model or SvcV-1 Services Context Description model. There may not be
a one-to-one correspondence between an operational activity and a location in OV-2 and a
resource in SV-1 Systems Interface Description model or SvcV-1 Services Context
Description model. For example, an Operational Activity and location may be realized by two
systems, where one provides backup for the other, or it may be that the functionality of an
Operational Activity has to be split between two locations for practical reasons.
Needlines can be represented by arrows (indicating the direction of flow) and are annotated
with a diagram-unique identifier and a phrase that is descriptive of the principal type of
exchange - it may be convenient to present these phrases (or numerical labels) in a key to
the diagram to prevent cluttering. It is important to note that the arrows (with identifiers) on
the diagram represent Needlines only. This means that each arrow indicates only that there
is a need for the transfer of some resource between the two connected Activities or
locations. A Needline can be uni-directional. Because Needline identifiers are often needed to
provide a trace reference for Resource Flow requirements (see OV-3 Operational Resource
Flow Matrix), a combined approach, with numerical and text labels, can be used.
There may be several Needlines (in the same direction) from one resource to another. This
may occur because some Needlines are only relevant to certain scenarios, missions or
mission phases. In this case, when producing the OV-2 for the specific case, a subset of all
of the Needlines should be displayed. There can be a one-to-many relationship from
Needlines to Resource Flow (e.g., a single Needline in OV-2 represents multiple individual
Resource Flows). The mapping of the Resource Flows to the Needlines of OV-2 occurs in the
Operational Resource Flow Matrix (OV-3). For example, OV-2 may list Situation Report as a
descriptive name for a Needline between two Operational resources. In this case, the
Needline represents a number of resource flow (information in this case) exchanges,
consisting of various types of reports (information elements), and their attributes (such as
145
=== page 146 ===
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:47 PM]
periodicity and timeliness) that are associated with the Situation Report Needline. The
identity of the individual elements and their attributes are documented in OV-3 Operational
Resource Flow Matrix model.
For complex Architectural Descriptions, OV-2 may consist of multiple graphics. There are
several different ways to decompose OV-2. One method involves using multiple levels of
abstraction and decomposing the Resource Flows. Another method involves restricting the
Resource Flows and Needlines on any given graphic to those associated with a subset of
operational activities. Finally it is possible to organize OV-2 in terms of scenarios, missions or
mission phases. All of these methods are valid and can be used together.
Flows of Funding, Personnel and Material:
In addition to Needlines, Resource Flow Connectors can be used to overlay contextual
information about how the Operational Activities and Locations interact via physical flows.
This information helps to provide context for the business roles. Examples of Resource Flow
Connector usage would be:
Representing a logistics capability may have an interaction which involves supplying
(physically delivering) personnel.
Representing an air-to-air refueling capability may have an interaction with airborne
platform capabilities which involves transfer of fuel.
Representing a sensor capability may have an interaction with a target through a flow
of physical energy that is sensed; this is not an information flow.
This is achieved by overlaying the Resource Flow Connectors on the diagram using a
notation that is clearly distinct from Needlines (which only represent the requirement to flow
resources).
Operational Activities:
The operational activities (from the OV-5b Operational Activity Model) performed may be
listed on the graphic, if space permits. OV-2 and the OV-5b Operational Activity Model are
complementary descriptions. OV-2 focuses on the Operational Resource Flows, with the
activities being a secondary adornment. The OV-5b, on the other hand, places first-order
attention on operational activities and only second-order attention on Resource Flows, which
can be shown as annotations or swim lanes on the activities. In developing an Architectural
Description, OV-2 and OV-5b Operational Activity Model are often the starting points and
these may be developed iteratively.
OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept Graphic
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
OV-6a, 6b, 6c: Introduction
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
OV-6b: State Transition Description
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
146
=== page 147 ===
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:44:47 PM]
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
147
=== page 148 ===
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:44:49 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
The OV-3 addresses operational Resource Flows exchanged between Operational Activities
and locations.
Resource Flows provide further detail of the interoperability requirements associated with the
operational capability of interest. The focus is on Resource Flows that cross the capability
boundary.
The intended usage of the OV-3 includes:
. Definition of interoperability requirements.
Detailed Description:
The OV-3 identifies the resource transfers that are necessary to support operations to
achieve a specific operational task. This model is initially constructed from the information
contained in the OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description model. But the OV-3 provides
a more detailed definition of the Resource Flows for operations within a community of
anticipated users.
The Operational Resource Flow Matrix details Resource Flow exchanges by identifying which
Operational Activity and locations exchange what resources, with whom, why the resource is
necessary, and the key attributes of the associated resources. The OV-3 identifies resource
elements and relevant attributes of the Resource Flows and associates the exchange to the
producing and consuming Operational Activities and locations and to the Needline that the
Resource Flow satisfies. OV-3 is one of a suite of operational models that address the
resource content of the operational architecture (the others being OV-2 Operational Resource
Flow Description, OV-5b Operational Activity Model, and DIV-2 Logical Data Model).
Needlines are logical requirements-based collaboration relationships between Operational
Activities and locations (as shown in OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description). A
Needline can be uni-directional.
A resource element (see DIV-2 Logical Data Model) is a formalized representation of
Resource Flows subject to an operational process. Resource elements may mediate activity
flows and dependencies (see OV-5b Operational Activity Model). Hence they may also be
carried by Needlines that express collaboration relationships. The same resource element
may be used in one or more Resource Flows.
The emphasis in this model is on the logical and operational characteristics of the Resource
Flows being exchanged, with focus on the Resource Flows crossing the capability boundary.
It is important to note that OV-3 is not intended to be an exhaustive listing of all the details
contained in every Resource Flow of every Operational Activity and location associated with
the Architectural Description in question. Rather, this model is intended to capture the most
important aspects of selected Resource Flows.
The aspects of the Resource Flow that are crucial to the operational mission will be tracked
as attributes in OV-3. For example, if the subject Architectural Description concerns tactical
battlefield targeting, then the timeliness of the enemy target information is a significant
attribute of the Resource Flow. To support the needs of security architecture, Resource Flows
should also address criticality and classification. There is an important caveat on use of OV-3
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
148
=== page 149 ===
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:44:49 PM]
for security architectures. In that context, it is important to identify every possible and
required exchange.
There is not always a one-to-one mapping of OV-3 Resource Flows to OV-2 Operational
Resource Flow Description Needlines; rather, many individual Resource Flows may be
associated with one Needline.
The OV-3 information can be presented in tabular form. DoDAF V2.0 does not prescribe the
column headings in an OV-3 Matrix.
OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept Graphic
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
OV-6a, 6b, 6c: Introduction
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
OV-6b: State Transition Description
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
149
=== page 150 ===
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-4.html[3/3/2011 3:44:52 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
The OV-4 shows organizational structures and interactions. The organizations shown may be
civil or military. The OV-4 exists in two forms; role-based (e.g., a typical brigade command
structure) and actual (e.g., an organization chart for a department or agency).
A role-based OV-4 shows the possible relationships between organizational resources. The
key relationship is composition, i.e., one organizational resource being part of a parent
organization. In addition to this, the architect may show the roles each organizational
resource has, and the interactions between those roles, i.e., the roles represent the
functional aspects of organizational resources. There are no prescribed resource interactions
in DoDAF V2.0: the architect should select an appropriate interaction type from the DM2 or
add a new one. Interactions illustrate the fundamental roles and management
responsibilities, such as supervisory reporting, Command and Control (C2) relationships,
collaboration and so on.
An actual OV-4 shows the structure of a real organization at a particular point in time, and is
used to provide context to other parts of the architecture such as AV-1 and the CVs.
The intended usage of the role-based OV-4 includes:
Organizational analysis.
Definition of human roles.
Operational analysis.
The intended usage of the actual OV-4 includes:
Identify architecture stakeholders.
Identify process owners.
Illustrate current or future organization structures.
Detailed Description:
The OV-4 addresses the organizational aspects of an Architectural Description. A typical OV-
4 illustrates the command structure or relationships (as opposed to relationships with
respect to a business process flow) among human roles, organizations, or organization types
that are the key players in the business represented by the architecture. An actual OV-4
shows real organizations and the relationships between them.
The more commonly used types of organizational relationship will be defined, in time, in the
DoDAF Meta-model. DoDAF defines fundamental relationships between Organizational
Resources; including structure (whole-part) and interaction. The interaction relationship
covers most types of organizational relationship. An OV-4 clarifies the various relationships
that can exist between organizations and sub-organizations within the Architectural
Description and between internal and external organizations. Where there is a need for other
types of organizational relationships, these should be recorded and defined in the AV-2
Integrated Dictionary as extensions to the DM2.
Organizational relationships are important to depict in an architecture model, because they
can illustrate fundamental human roles (e.g., who or what type of skill is needed to conduct
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
150
=== page 151 ===
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-4.html[3/3/2011 3:44:52 PM]
operational activities) as well as management relationships (e.g., command structure or
relationship to other key players). Also, organizational relationships are drivers for some of
the collaboration requirements that are viewed using Needlines.
Note that individual people are not viewed in DoDAF, but specific billets or Person Types may
be detailed in an actual OV-4.
In both the typical and specific cases, it is possible to overlay resource interaction
relationships which denote relationships between organizational elements that are not strictly
hierarchical (e.g., a customer-supplier relationship).
The organizations that are modeled using OV-4 may also appear in other models, for
example in the SV-1 Systems Interface Description as organizational constituents of a
capability or a resource and PV-1 Project Portfolio Relationships where organizations own
projects. In a SV-1 Systems Interface Description, for instance, the organizational resources
defined in a typical OV-4 may be part of a capability or resources. Also, actual organizations
may form elements of a fielded capability which realizes the requirements at the system-
level (again, this may be depicted on a SV-1 Systems Interface Description).
A OV-4 may show types of organizations and the typical structure of those organizations.
The OV-4 may alternatively show actual, specific organizations (e.g., the DoD) at some point
in time. Alternatively, an OV-4 may be a hybrid diagram showing typical and actual
organization structures.
OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept Graphic
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
OV-6a, 6b, 6c: Introduction
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
OV-6b: State Transition Description
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
151
=== page 152 ===
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree and OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-5ab.html[3/3/2011 3:44:55 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree and OV-5b: Operational Activity
Model
The OV-5a and the OV-5b describe the operations that are normally conducted in the course
of achieving a mission or a business goal. It describes operational activities (or tasks);
Input/Output flows between activities, and to/from activities that are outside the scope of
the Architectural Description.
The OV-5a and OV-5b describes the operational activities that are being conducted within
the mission or scenario. The OV-5a and OV-5b can be used to:
Clearly delineate lines of responsibility for activities when coupled with OV-2.
Uncover unnecessary Operational Activity redundancy.
Make decisions about streamlining, combining, or omitting activities.
Define or flag issues, opportunities, or operational activities and their interactions
(information flows among the activities) that need to be scrutinized further.
Provide a necessary foundation for depicting activity sequencing and timing in the OV-
6a Operational Rules Model, the OV-6b State Transition Description, and the OV-6c
Event-Trace Description.
The OV-5b describes the operational, business, and defense portion of the intelligence
community activities associated with the Architectural Description, as well as the:
Relationships or dependencies among the activities.
Resources exchanged between activities.
External interchanges (from/to business activities that are outside the scope of the
model).
An Operational Activity is what work is required, specified independently of how it is carried
out. To maintain this independence from implementation, logical activities and locations in
OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description are used to represent the structure which
carries out the Operational Activities. Operational Activities are realized as System Functions
(described in SV-4 Systems Functionality Description) or Service Functions (described in
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description) which are the how to the Operational Activities
what, i.e., they are specified in terms of the resources that carry them out.
The intended usage of the OV-5a and OV-5b includes:
Description of activities and workflows.
Requirements capture.
Definition of roles and responsibilities.
Support task analysis to determine training needs.
Problem space definition.
Operational planning.
Logistic support analysis.
Information flow analysis.
Detailed Description:
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
152
=== page 153 ===
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree and OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-5ab.html[3/3/2011 3:44:55 PM]
The OV-5s and OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description model are, to a degree,
complements of each other. The OV-5s focuses on the operational activities whereas OV-2
Operational Resource Flow Description model focuses on the operational activities in relation
to locations. Due to the relationship between locations and operational activities, these types
of models should normally be developed together. An OV-5a or OV-5b describes the
operational activites (or tasks) that are normally conducted in the course of achieving a
mission or a business goal. The OV-5b also describes Input/Output flows between activities,
and to/from activities that are outside the scope of the Architectural Description. The OV-5a
and OV-5b are equally suited to describing non-military activities and are expected to be
used extensively for business modeling.
The activities described in an OV-5a or OV-5b are standard Operational Activities which are
mapped to corresponding capabilities in the CV-6 Capability to Operational Activities
Mapping. Standard Operational Activities are those defined in doctrine, but which are not
tailored to a specific system, i.e., they are generic enough to be used without closing off a
range of possible solutions.
Possible Construction Methods: DoDAF does not endorse a specific activity modeling
methodology. The OV-5b can be constructed using Integration Definition for Function
Modeling (IDEF0) or Class Diagrams.
There are two basic ways to depict Activity Models:
The Activity Decomposition Tree shows activities depicted in a tree structure and is
typically used to provide a navigation aid.
The Activity Model shows activities connected by Resource Flows; it supports
development of an OV-3 Operational Resource Flow Matrix.
The OV-5a helps provide an overall picture of the activities involved and a quick reference
for navigating the OV-5b.
OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept Graphic
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
OV-6a, 6b, 6c: Introduction
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
OV-6b: State Transition Description
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
153
=== page 154 ===
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-6a.html[3/3/2011 3:44:58 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
An OV-6a specifies operational or business rules that are constraints on the way that
business is done in the enterprise. At a top-level, rules should at least embody the concepts
of operations defined in OV-1 High Level Operational Concept Graphic and provide guidelines
for the development and definition of more detailed rules and behavioral definitions that
should occur later in the Architectural definition process.
The intended usage of the OV-6a includes:
Definition of doctrinally correct operational procedures.
Definition of business rules.
Identification of operational constraints.
Detailed Description:
The OV-6a specifies operational or business rules that are constraints on the way business is
done in the enterprise. While other OV Models (e.g., OV-1 High Level Operational Concept
Graphic, OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description, and OV-5b Operational Activity Model)
describe the structure and operation of a business, for the most part they do not describe
the constraints and rules under which it operates.
At the mission-level, OV-6a may be based on business rules contained in doctrine, guidance,
rules of engagement, etc. At lower levels, OV-6a describes the rules under which the
architecture behave under specified conditions. Such rules can be expressed in a textual
form, for example, If (these conditions) exist, and (this event) occurs, then (perform these
actions). These rules are contrasted with the business or doctrinal standards themselves,
which provide authoritative references and provenance for the rules (see StdV-1 Standards
Profile). Operational Rules are statements that constrain some aspect of the mission or the
architecture. Rules may be expressed in natural language (English) in one of two forms:
Imperative - a statement of what shall be under all conditions, e.g., "Battle Damage
Assessment (BDA) shall only be carried out under fair weather conditions."
Conditional Imperative - a statement of what shall be, in the event of another
condition being met. If battle damage assessment shows incomplete strike, then a re-
strike shall be carried out.
As the model name implies, the rules captured in OV-6a are operational (i.e., mission-
oriented) whereas resource-oriented rules are defined in the SV-10s or the SvcV-10s (OV-6
is the what to the SV-10's or SvcV-10's how). OV-6a rules can include such guidance as the
conditions under which operational control passes from one entity to another or the
conditions under which a human role is authorized to proceed with a specific activity.
A rule defined in textual form OV-6a may be applied to any Architectural element defined in
an OV. A rule defined in a more structured way (i.e., for the purposes of sharing with other
architects) should be defined in association with locations, operational activities or missions.
Rules defined in an OV-6a may optionally be presented in any other OV. For example, a rule
"battle damage assessment shall be carried out under fair weather conditions" may be linked
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
154
=== page 155 ===
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-6a.html[3/3/2011 3:44:58 PM]
to the Conduct BDA activity in OV-5b. Any natural language rule presented (e.g., in a
diagram note) should also be listed in OV-6a.
OV-6a rules may be associated with activities in OV-5a Operational Activity Decomposition
Tree and OV-5b Operational Activity Model and can be useful to overlay the rules on an OV-
5a Operational Activity Decomposition or OV-5b Operational Activity Model. OV-6a can also
be used to extend the capture of business requirements by constraining the structure and
validity of DIV-2 Logical Data Model elements.
Detailed rules can become quite complex, and the structuring of the rules themselves can
often be challenging. DoDAF does not specify how OV-6a rules will be specified, other than in
English.
From a modeling perspective, operational constraints may act upon Locations, Operational
Activities, Missions, and Entities in Logical Data Models.
OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept Graphic
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
OV-6a, 6b, 6c: Introduction
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
OV-6b: State Transition Description
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
155
=== page 156 ===
OV-6b: State Transition Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-6b.html[3/3/2011 3:45:00 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
OV-6b: State Transition Description.
The OV-6b is a graphical method of describing how an Operational Activity responds to
various events by changing its state. The diagram represents the sets of events to which the
Activities respond (by taking an action to move to a new state) as a function of its current
state. Each transition specifies an event and an action.
An OV-6b can be used to describe the detailed sequencing of activities or work flow in the
business process. The OV-6b is particularly useful for describing critical sequencing of
behaviors and timing of operational activities that cannot be adequately described in the OV-
5b Operational Activity Model. The OV-6b relates events and states. A change of state is
called a transition. Actions may be associated with a given state or with the transition
between states in response to stimuli (e.g., triggers and events).
The intended usage of the OV-6b includes:
Analysis of business events.
Behavioral analysis.
Identification of constraints.
Detailed Description:
The OV-6b reflects the fact that the explicit sequencing of activities in response to external
and internal events is not fully expressed in OV-5a Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
or OV-5b Operational Activity Model. Alternatively, OV-6b can be used to reflect the explicit
sequencing of actions internal to a single Operational Activity or the sequencing of
operational activities. OV-6b is based on the statechart diagram. A state machine is defined
as "a specification that describes all possible behaviors of some dynamic view element.
Behavior is viewed as a traversal of a graph of state interconnected by one or more joined
transition arcs that are triggered by the dispatching of a series of event instances. During
this traversal, the state machine executes a series of actions associated with various
elements of the state machine."
State chart diagrams can be unambiguously converted to structured textual rules that
specify timing aspects of operational events and the responses to these events, with no loss
of meaning. However, the graphical form of the state diagrams can often allow quick
analysis of the completeness of the rule set, and detection of dead ends or missing
conditions. These errors, if not detected early during the operational analysis phase, can
often lead to serious behavioral errors in fielded systems or to expensive correction efforts.
States in an OV-6b may be nested. This enables quite complex models to be created to
represent operational behavior.
OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept Graphic
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
156
=== page 157 ===
OV-6b: State Transition Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-6b.html[3/3/2011 3:45:00 PM]
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
OV-6a, 6b, 6c: Introduction
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
OV-6b: State Transition Description
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
157
=== page 158 ===
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-6c.html[3/3/2011 3:45:07 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Operational Viewpoint
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
The OV-6c provides a time-ordered examination of the Resource Flows as a result of a
particular scenario. Each event-trace diagram should have an accompanying description that
defines the particular scenario or situation. Operational Event/Trace Descriptions, sometimes
called sequence diagrams, event scenarios, or timing diagrams, allow the tracing of actions
in a scenario or critical sequence of events. The OV-6c can be used by itself or in conjunction
with an OV-6b State Transition Description to describe the dynamic behavior of activities.
The intended usage of the OV-6c includes:
Analysis of operational events.
Behavioral analysis.
Identification of non-functional user requirements.
Operational test scenarios.
Detailed Description:
The OV-6c is valuable for moving to the next level of detail from the initial operational
concepts. An OV-6c model helps define interactions and operational threads. The OV-6c can
also help ensure that each participating Operational Activity and Location has the necessary
information it needs at the right time to perform its assigned Operational Activity.
The OV-6c enables the tracing of actions in a scenario or critical sequence of events. OV-6c
can be used by itself or in conjunction with OV-6b State Transition Description to describe
the dynamic behavior of business activities or a mission/operational thread. An operational
thread is defined as a set of operational activities, with sequence and timing attributes of the
activities, and includes the resources needed to accomplish the activities. A particular
operational thread may be used to depict a military or business capability. In this manner, a
capability is defined in terms of the attributes required to accomplish a given mission
objective by modeling the set of activities and their attributes. The sequence of activities
forms the basis for defining and understanding the many factors that impact on the overall
capability.
The information content of messages in an OV-6c may be related with the Resource Flows in
the OV-3 Operational Resource Flow Matrix and OV-5b Operational Activity Model and
information entities in the DIV-2 Logical Data Model.
Possible Construction Methods: DoDAF does not endorse a specific event-trace modeling
methodology. An OV-6c may be developed using any modeling notation (e.g., BPMN) that
supports the layout of timing and sequence of activities along with the Resource Flow
exchanges that occur between Operational Activities/Locations for a given scenario. Different
scenarios can be depicted by separate diagrams.
OV-1: High-Level Operational Concept Graphic
OV-2: Operational Resource Flow Description
OV-3: Operational Resource Flow Matrix
OV-4: Organizational Relationships Chart
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
158
=== page 159 ===
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/OV-6c.html[3/3/2011 3:45:07 PM]
OV-5a: Operational Activity Decomposition Tree
OV-5b: Operational Activity Model
OV-6a, 6b, 6c: Introduction
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model
OV-6b: State Transition Description
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
159
=== page 160 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Project Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/project.html[3/3/2011 3:37:27 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Project Viewpoint
The DoDAF-described Models within the Project Viewpoint describe how programs, projects,
portfolios, or initiatives deliver capabilities, the organizations contributing to them, and
dependencies between them. Previous versions of DoDAF took a traditional model of
architecture in which descriptions of programs and projects were considered outside scope.
To compensate for this, various DoDAF models represented the evolution of systems,
technologies and standards (e.g., Systems and Services Evolution Description, Systems
Technology Forecast, and Technical Standards Forecast).
The integration of Project Models (organizational and project-oriented) with the more
traditional architecture models is a characteristic aspect of DoDAF V2.0-based enterprise
Architectural Descriptions. These models expand the usability of the DoDAF by including
information about programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives and relating that information
to capabilities and other programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives thus expanding DoDAF’s
support to the portfolio management (PfM) process. Different levels of cost data can be
captured in the architecture, based on the Process-owners requirements. An example is a
Work Breakdown Structure, depicted as a Gantt chart.
Project Model Descriptions
Model Description
PV-1: Project
Portfolio
Relationships
It describes the dependency relationships between the organizations and
projects and the organizational structures needed to manage a portfolio
of projects.
PV-2: Project
Timelines
A timeline perspective on programs or projects, with the key milestones
and interdependencies.
PV-3: Project to
Capability
Mapping
A mapping of programs and projects to capabilities to show how the
specific projects and program elements help to achieve a capability.
 
Mappings of
 the Project Viewpoint Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models to the DM2 Concepts,
Associations, and Attributes are in DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes Mapping
to DoDAF-described Models . The DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes are
described in the DoDAF Meta-model Data Dictionary .
Uses of Project Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models . As stated above, the Project
Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models contain information that improves DoDAF's support to
the portfolio management process. It is important to be able to look across portfolios (i.e.,
groups of investments) to ensure that all possible alternatives for a particular decision have
been exhausted to make the most informed decision possible in support of the Department.
Relating project information to the responsible organizations, as well as to other projects,
forms a valuable architecture construct that supports PfM.
Incorporation of these models also makes the DoDAF a value-added framework to support
the PPBE process. These models are especially applicable to the Programming Phase of the
PPBE process. It is within this phase that the Program Objective Memorandum (POM) is
developed. The POM seeks to construct a balanced set of programs that respond to the
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
160
=== page 161 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Project Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/project.html[3/3/2011 3:37:27 PM]
guidance and priorities of the Joint Programming Guidance within fiscal constraints. When
completed, the POM provides a fairly detailed and comprehensive description of the proposed
programs, which can include a time-phased allocation of resources (personnel, funding,
materiel, and information) by program projected into the future. The information captured
within the Project models (e.g., project relationships, timelines, capabilities) can be used
within the PPBE process to develop the POM. Using these models enables decision-makers to
perform well-informed planning and complements the use of the Capability Models.
The Project Models can be used to answer questions such as:
What capabilities are delivered as part of this project?
Are there other projects that either affect or are affected by this project? To what
portfolios do the projects or projects belong?
What are the important milestones relative to this project? When can I expect
capabilities to be rendered by this project to be in place?
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
161
=== page 162 ===
PV-1: Project Portfolio Relationships
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:10 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Project Viewpoint
PV-1: Project Portfolio Relationships
The PV-1 represents an organizational perspective on programs, projects, portfolios, or
initiatives.
The PV-1 enables the user to model the organizational structures needed to manage
programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives. It shows dependency relationships between the
actual organizations that own the programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives. This model
could be used to represent organizational relationships associated with transformation
initiatives along with those who are responsible for managing programs, projects, and
portfolios. The PV-1 provides a means of analyzing the main dependencies between
acquisition elements or transformation elements.
The intended usage of the PV-1 includes, but is not limited to:
Program management (specified acquisition program structure).
Project organization.
Cross-cutting initiatives to be tracked across portfolios.
Detailed Description:
The PV-1 describes how acquisition projects are grouped in organizational terms as a
coherent portfolio of acquisition programs or projects, or initiatives related to several
portfolios. The PV-1 provides a way of describing the organizational relationships between
multiple acquisition projects or portfolios, each of which are responsible for delivering
individual systems or capabilities. By definition, this model covers acquisition portfolios or
programs consisting of multiple projects and is generally not for an individual project. In
essence, PV-1 is an organizational breakdown consisting of actual organizations (see OV-4
Organizational Relationships Chart model). The model is strongly linked with the CV-4
Capability Dependencies model which shows capability groupings and dependencies.
The PV-1 is hierarchical in nature. Higher-level groupings of projects (the organizations that
own these projects) form acquisition programs or initiatives.
The intent of a PV-1 is to show:
All of the acquisition projects delivering services, systems, or SoS within the
acquisition programs under consideration.
Cross-cutting initiatives to be tracked across portfolios.
Other services, systems, and SoS which may have a bearing on the architecture.
How the services or systems will be best integrated into an acquisition program.
The nesting of acquisition programs to form a hierarchy.
A PV-1 is specific to a particular point in the project lifecycle. This may change through time,
i.e., the projects may change as new services, systems and capabilities are introduced into
the acquisition program. Hence, it is possible that an acquisition program could have more
than one PV-1, each showing how the acquisition projects are arranged for relevant periods
of time. This is achieved by tying the PV-1 model to a capability phase in the CV-3
Capability Dependencies model.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
162
=== page 163 ===
PV-1: Project Portfolio Relationships
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:10 PM]
PV-1: Project Portfolio Relationships
PV-2: Project Timelines
PV-3: Project to Capability Mapping
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
163
=== page 164 ===
PV-2: Project Timelines
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:45:13 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Project Viewpoint
PV-2: Project Timelines
The PV-2 provides a timeline perspective on programs. The PV-2 is intended primarily to
support the acquisition and fielding processes including the management of dependencies
between projects and the integration of DoDD 5000.1 Defense Acquisition System policies to
achieve a successfully integrated capability. The PV-2 is not limited to the acquisition and
fielding processes.
The intended usage of the PV-2 includes:
Project management and control (including delivery timescales).
Project dependency risk identification.
Management of dependencies.
Portfolio management.
Detailed Description:
The PV-2 provides an overview of a program or portfolio of individual projects, or initiatives,
based on a timeline. Portfolios, Programs, Projects, and Initiatives may be broken into work
streams to show the dependencies at a lower-level. For capability-based procurement, these
work streams might conveniently be equated with JCA. Sometimes, however, it is more
appropriate to consider these acquisition projects in their own right.
Where appropriate, the PV-2 may also summarize, for each of the projects illustrated, the
level of maturity achieved across the DoDD 5000.1 Defense Acquisition System policies at
each stage of the DAS lifecycle, and the interdependencies between the project stages.
The PV-2 is intended primarily to support the acquisition and fielding processes including the
management of dependencies between projects and the integration of DoDD 5000.1 Defense
Acquisition System policies to achieve a successfully integrated capability. However, the PV-
2 is not limited to the acquisition and fielding processes. The information provided by the
Model can be used to determine the impact of either planned or unplanned programmatic
changes, and highlight opportunities for optimization across the delivery program. The
inclusion of the DoDD 5000.1 Defense Acquisition System policy information allows areas of
concern that are outside the immediate scope being considered. Areas of concern identified
across the DoDD 5000.1 Defense Acquisition System policies, e.g., a shortfall in training
resource, can be coordinated across a program or group of projects, each of which require
additional activity to be initiated for successfully delivery according to the project/program
schedule.
Although a PV-2 may be compiled for a single system project, with supporting work streams,
the model becomes particularly useful when considering the dependencies between the
multiple projects (or increments within them) that contribute to an acquisition program.
Such an acquisition program may be an oversight organization or any other useful grouping
of projects that have strong dependencies or contribute towards a common goal (see CV-1
Vision model). Typical use of PV-2 is to represent an individual system development for use
in the CV-3 Capability Phasing, while an Integrated Product Team (IPT) may be delivering
several systems simultaneously. While PV-2 is expected to support acquisition management
for a program consisting of a portfolio of acquisition projects, it may sometimes be
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
164
=== page 165 ===
PV-2: Project Timelines
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:45:13 PM]
convenient to use a PV-2 timeline model for other purposes, e.g., to show temporal
relationships between transformation initiatives at the strategic-level or for technology
roadmapping.
A PV-2 graphically displays the key milestones and interdependencies between the multiple
projects that constitute a program, portfolio, or initiative. Use of PV-2 should support the
management of capability delivery and be aligned with the CV-3 Capability Phasing model, if
one exists. One presentational format for a PV-2 can be a Gantt chart that displays the
entire lifecycle of each project, together with dependencies between them.
Optionally, the Gantt chart may be enhanced to show the level of maturity for each of the
DOTMLPF factors associated with that project at each key milestone. The colored icon can be
a segmented circular pie chart, a regular polyhedron or any appropriate graphic, providing
that the graphic is explained and covers all DAS requirements.
PV-1: Project Portfolio Relationships
PV-2: Project Timelines
PV-3: Project to Capability Mapping
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
165
=== page 166 ===
PV-3: Project to Capability Mapping
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:45:17 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Project Viewpoint
PV-3: Project to Capability Mapping
The PV-3 supports the acquisition and deployment processes, including the management of
dependencies between projects and the integration of all relevant project and program
elements to achieve a capability.
The PV-3 maps programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives to capabilities to show how the
specific elements help to achieve a capability. Programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives are
mapped to the capability for a particular timeframe. Programs, projects, portfolios, or
initiatives may contribute to multiple capabilities and may mature across time. The analysis
can be used to identify capability redundancies and shortfalls, highlight phasing issues,
expose organizational or system interoperability problems, and support program decisions,
such as when to phase out a legacy system.
The intended usage of the PV-3 includes:
Tracing capability requirements to projects.
Capability audit.
Detailed Description:
The PV-3 describes the mapping between capabilities and the programs, projects, portfolios,
or initiatives that would support the capabilities. This model may be used to indicate that a
project does or does not fulfill the requirements for a capability for a particular phase.
This model is analogous to the SV-5a Operational Activity to System Function Traceability
Matrix, but provides the interface between Capability and Project Models rather than
Operational to System Models.
In principle, there could be a different PV-3 table created for each development phase of the
program, project, portfolio, or initiative development, or perhaps for different phasing
scenarios. In most cases, a single table can be constructed because the programs, projects,
portfolios, or initiatives that are most likely relevant to this model can be relatively high-
level. If capabilities associated are generic (see CV-1 Vision model), then they should have a
well understood relationship with a set of programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives and
this relationship is unlikely to change over time.
The PV-3 can have a tabular presentation. The rows can be the Capabilities and the columns
can be the programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives. An X can indicate where the
capability is supported by the programs, projects, portfolios, or initiatives whereas a blank
can indicate that it does not. Alternatively, a date or phase can indicate when programs,
projects, portfolios, or initiatives will support capabilities by the date or phase indicated.
PV-1: Project Portfolio Relationships
PV-2: Project Timelines
PV-3: Project to Capability Mapping
 
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
166
=== page 167 ===
PV-3: Project to Capability Mapping
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/PV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:45:17 PM]
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
167
=== page 168 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Services Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services.html[3/3/2011 3:37:29 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
The DoDAF-described Models within the Services Viewpoint describes services and their
interconnections providing or supporting, DoD functions. DoD functions include both
warfighting and business functions. The Service Models associate service resources to the
operational and capability requirements. These resources support the operational activities
and facilitate the exchange of information. The relationship between architectural data
elements across the Services Viewpoint to the Operational Viewpoint and Capability
Viewpoint can be exemplified as services are procured and fielded to support the operations
and capabilities of organizations. The structural and behavioral models in the OVs and SvcVs
allow architects and stakeholders to quickly ascertain which functions are carried out by
humans and which by Services for each alternative specification and so carry out trade
analysis based on risk, cost, reliability, etc.
Services are not limited to internal system functions and can include Human Computer
Interface (HCI) and Graphical User Interface (GUI) functions or functions that consume or
produce service data to or from service functions. The external service data providers and
consumers can be used to represent the human that interacts with the service.
Service Model Descriptions
Model Description
SvcV-1 Services Context Description The identification of services, service items, and
their interconnections.
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow
Description
A description of Resource Flows exchanged
between services.
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix The relationships among or between systems and
services in a given Architectural Description.
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix The relationships among services in a given
Architectural Description. It can be designed to
show relationships of interest, (e.g., service-type
interfaces, planned vs. existing interfaces).
SvcV-4 Services Functionality
Description
The functions performed by services and the
service data flows among service functions
(activities).
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to
Services Traceability Matrix
A mapping of services (activities) back to
operational activities (activities).
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow
Matrix
It provides details of service Resource Flow
elements being exchanged between services and
the attributes of that exchange.
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix The measures (metrics) of Services Model elements
for the appropriate timeframe(s).
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description The planned incremental steps toward migrating a
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
168
=== page 169 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Services Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services.html[3/3/2011 3:37:29 PM]
suite of services to a more efficient suite or toward
evolving current services to a future
implementation.
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills
Forecast
The emerging technologies, software/hardware
products, and skills that are expected to be
available in a given set of time frames and that will
affect future service development.
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model One of three models used to describe service
functionality. It identifies constraints that are
imposed on systems functionality due to some
aspect of system design or implementation.
SvcV-10b Services State Transition
Description
One of three models used to describe service
functionality. It identifies responses of services to
events.
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace
Description
One of three models used to describe service
functionality. It identifies service-specific
refinements of critical sequences of events
described in the Operational Viewpoint.
 
Mappings of
 the Services Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models to the DM2 Concepts,
Associations, and Attributes are in DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes Mapping
to DoDAF-described Models . The DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes are
described in the DoDAF Meta-model Data Dictionary .
Uses of Services Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models . Within the development process,
the service models describe the design for service-based solutions to support operational
requirements from the development processes (JCIDS) and Defense Acquisition System or
capability development within the JCAs.
Some of the Services Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models are discussed with examples in the
DoDAF Product Development Questionnaire Analysis Report.doc. This document can be
viewed online in the public DoDAF Journal.
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
169
=== page 170 ===
SvcV-1: Services Interface Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:19 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-1: Services Interface Description
The SvcV-1 addresses the composition and interaction of Services. For DoDAF V2.0, SvcV-1
incorporates human elements as types of Performers - Organizations and Personnel Types.
The SvcV-1 links together the operational and services architecture models by depicting how
resources are structured and interact to realize the logical architecture specified in an OV-2
Operational Resource Flow Description. A SvcV-1 may represent the realization of a
requirement specified in an OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description (i.e., in a "To-Be"
Architectural Description), and so there may be many alternative SvcV models that could
realize the operational requirement. Alternatively, in an "As-Is" Architectural Description, the
OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description may simply be a simplified, logical
representation of the SvcV-1 to allow communication of key Resource Flows to non-technical
stakeholders.
It is important for the architect to recognize that the SvcV-1 focuses on the Resource Flow
and the providing service. This differs from a SV-1 System Interface Description which
focuses on the System-to-System point-to-point interface, for which the Source System and
Target System have an agreed upon interface. For the SvcV-1, the focus on the provider and
the data provided is a Net-Centric Data Strategy tenet appropriate for a publish/subscribe
pattern. This pattern is not the only type of service that can be captured in the SvcV-1.
Sub-services may be identified in SvcV-1 to any level (i.e., depth) of decomposition the
architect sees fit. The SvcV-1 may also identify the Physical Assets (e.g., Platforms) at which
Resources are deployed, and optionally overlay Operational Activities and Locations that
utilize those Resources. In many cases, an operational activity and locations depicted in an
OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description may well be the logical representation of the
resource that is shown in SvcV-1.
The intended usage of the SvcV-1 includes:
Definition of service concepts.
Definition of service options.
Service Resource Flow requirements capture.
Capability integration planning.
Service integration management.
Operational planning (capability and performer definition).
The SvcV-1 is used in two complementary ways:
Describe the Resource Flows exchanged between resources in the architecture.
Describe a solution, or solution option, in terms of the components of capability and
their physical integration on platforms and other facilities.
Detailed Description:
A SvcV-1 can be used simply to depict services and sub-services and identify the Resource
Flows between them. The real benefit of a SvcV-1 is its ability to describe the human
aspects of an architecture and how they interact with Services. In addition, DoDAF has the
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
170
=== page 171 ===
SvcV-1: Services Interface Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:19 PM]
concept of Capability and Performers (see the Capability Meta-model group in the LDM)
which is used to depict Services, assets and people into a configuration, which can meet a
specific capability. A primary purpose of a SvcV-1 model is to show resource structure, i.e.,
identify the primary sub-services, performer and activities (functions) and their interactions.
SvcV-1 contributes to user understanding of the structural characteristics of the solution.
The physical resources contributing to a capability are either an organizational resource or a
physical asset, i.e., a service cannot contribute alone (it must be hosted on a physical asset
used by an organizational resource of both). Organizational aspects can now be shown on
SvcV-1 (e.g., who uses a service). Resource structures may be identified in SvcV-1 to any
level (i.e., depth) of decomposition the architect sees fit. DoDAF does not specifically use
terms like sub-service and component as these terms often denote a position relative to a
structural hierarchy. Any service may combine hardware and software or these can be
treated as separate (sub) services. DoDAF V2.0 includes human factors (as Personnel Types
and a type of Performer). Should an architect wish to describe a service which has human
elements, then groupings of Services, Personnel Types and Performers should be used to
wrap the human and service elements together.
A SvcV-1 can optionally be annotated with Operational Activities and Locations originally
specified in OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description. In this way, traceability can be
established from the logical OV structure to the physical Service Model structure.
If a single SvcV-1 is not possible, the resource of interest should be decomposed into
multiple SvcV-1 models.
Functions (Activities):
Some Resources can carry out service functions (activities) as described in SvcV-4 Services
Functionality Description models and these functions can optionally be overlaid on a SvcV-1.
In a sense SvcV-1 and SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description provide complementary
representations (structure and function). Either could be viewed first, but usually an iterative
approach is used to model these together gradually building up the level of detail in the
service description. Note that the same type (class) of resource may be used in different
contexts in a given SvcV-1. For this reason, the tracing of functions to resources is specified
in context of their usage (see DM2 for details).
Resource Flows in SvcV-1:
In addition to depicting Services (Performers) and their structure, SvcV-1 addresses Service
Resource Flows. A Service Resource Flow, as depicted in SvcV-1, is an indicator that
resources pass between one service and the other. In the case of Services, this can be
expanded into further detail in SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description model. A Service
Resource Flow is a simplified representation of a pathway or network pattern, usually
depicted graphically as a connector (i.e., a line with possible amplifying information). The
SvcV-1 depicts all Resource Flows between resources that are of interest. Note that
Resource Flows between resources may be further specified in detail in the SvcV-2 Services
Resource Flow Description model and the SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix.
Interactions are only possible between services and systems. Service Resource Flows provide
a specification for how the Resource Flow exchanges specified in OV-2 Operational Resource
Flow Description Needlines are realized with services. A single Needline shown in the OV-2
Operational Resource Flow Description may translate into multiple Service Resource Flows.
The actual implementation of Service Resource Flows may take more than one form (e.g.,
multiple physical links). Details of the physical pathways or network patterns that implement
the interfaces are documented in SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description. Resource
Flows are summarized in a SvcV-3a System-Service Matrix or SvcV-3b Service-Service
Matrix and detailed definitions and attributes specific to each Service Resource Flows may be
described in SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix.
The functions performed by the resources are specified in a SvcV-4 Service Functionality
Description, but may optionally be overlaid on the Resources in a SvcV-1.
171
=== page 172 ===
SvcV-1: Services Interface Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:19 PM]
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
172
=== page 173 ===
SvcV-2: Services Resource Flow Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-2.html[3/3/2011 3:45:22 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-2: Services Resource Flow Description
A SvcV-2 specifies the Resource Flows between Services and may also list the protocol
stacks used in connections.
A SvcV-2 DoDAF-described Model is used to give a precise specification of a connection
between Services. This may be an existing connection or a specification of a connection that
is to be made for a future connection.
The intended usage of the SvcV-2 includes:
Resource Flow specification.
Detailed Description:
For a network data service, a SvcV-2 comprises Services, their ports, and the Service
Resource Flows between those ports. The SvcV-2 may also be used to describe non-IT type
services such as Search and Rescue. The architect may choose to create a diagram for each
Service Resource Flow and the producing Service, each Service Resource Flow and
consuming Service, or to show all the Service Resource Flows on one diagram, if this is
possible.
Each SvcV-2 model can show:
Which ports are connected.
The producing Services that the ports belong to.
The Services that the Service Resource Flows are consumed by.
The definition of the Service Resource Flow in terms of the physical/logical
connectivity and any protocols that are used in the connection.
Note that networks are represented as Services. The architect may choose to show other
Services being components of the network, i.e., if they are part of the network
infrastructure.
Any protocol referred to in a SvcV-2 diagram needs be defined in the StdV-1 Standards
Profile.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
173
=== page 174 ===
SvcV-2: Services Resource Flow Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-2.html[3/3/2011 3:45:22 PM]
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
174
=== page 175 ===
SvcV-3a: Systems-Services Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-3a.html[3/3/2011 3:45:25 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-3a: Systems-Services Matrix
A SvcV-3a enables a quick overview of all the system-to-service resource interactions
specified in one or more SvcV-1 Services Context Description models. The SvcV-3a provides
a tabular summary of the system and services interactions specified in the SvcV-1 Services
Context Description for the Architectural Description. This model can be useful in support
existing systems that are transitioning to provide services. The matrix format supports a
rapid assessment of potential commonalities and redundancies (or, if fault-tolerance is
desired, the lack of redundancies).
The SvcV-3a can be organized in a number of ways to emphasize the association of system-
to-service interactions in context with the architecture's purpose.
The intended usage of the SvcV-3a includes:
Summarizing system and service resource interactions.
Interface management.
Comparing interoperability characteristics of solution options.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-1 concentrates on Service resources and their interactions, and these are
summarized in a SvcV-3a or SvcV-3b. The SvcV-3a DoDAF-described Model can be a useful
tool for managing the evolution of solutions and infrastructures, the insertion of new
technologies and functionality, and the redistribution of Systems and Services and activities
in context with evolving operational requirements.
Depending upon the purpose of the architecture, there could be several SvcV-3a DoDAF-
described Models. The suite of SvcV-3a models can be organized in a number of ways (e.g.,
by domain, by operational mission phase, by solution option) to emphasize the association of
groups of resource pairs in context with the Architectural Description's purpose.
The SvcV-3a is generally presented as a matrix, where the System and Services resources
are listed in the rows and columns of the matrix, and each cell indicates an interaction
between Systems and Services if one exists. Many types of interaction information can be
presented in the cells of a SvcV-3a. The resource interactions can be represented using
different symbols and/or color coding that depicts different interaction characteristics, for
example:
Status (e.g., existing, planned, potential, de-activated).
Key interfaces.
Category (e.g., command and control, intelligence, personnel, logistics).
Classification-level (e.g., Restricted, Confidential, Secret, Top Secret).
Communication means (e.g., Rim Loop Interface, Scalable Loop Interface).
DoDAF does not specify the symbols to be used. If symbols are used, a key for the symbols
is needed.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
175
=== page 176 ===
SvcV-3a: Systems-Services Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-3a.html[3/3/2011 3:45:25 PM]
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
176
=== page 177 ===
SvcV-3b: Services-Services Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-3b.html[3/3/2011 3:45:28 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-3b: Services-Services Matrix
A SvcV-3b enables a quick overview of all the services resource interactions specified in one
or more SvcV-1 Services Context Description models. The SvcV-3b provides a tabular
summary of the services interactions specified in the SvcV-1 Services Context Description for
the Architectural Description. The matrix format supports a rapid assessment of potential
commonalities and redundancies (or, if fault-tolerance is desired, the lack of redundancies).
In addition, this model is useful in support of net-centric (service-oriented) implementation
of services as an input to the SvcV-10a Services Rules Model, SvcV-10b Services State
Transition Description, and SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description, implemented as
orchestrations of services.
The SvcV-3b can be organized in a number of ways to emphasize the association of service
pairs in context with the architecture's purpose. One type of organization is a Service
Hierarchy or Taxonomy of Services.
The intended usage of the SvcV-3b includes:
Summarizing service resource interactions.
Interface management.
Comparing interoperability characteristics of solution options.
It is important to note that one usage of the Service-Service Matrix (SvcV-3b) can support a
net- centric (service-oriented) implementation in describing the interactions between
producing services and consuming services.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-1 concentrates on Service resources and their interactions, and these are
summarized in a SvcV-3a or SvcV-3b. The SvcV-3b can be a useful tool for managing the
evolution of solutions and infrastructures, the insertion of new technologies and functionality,
and the redistribution of Services and activities in context with evolving operational
requirements.
Depending upon the purpose of the architecture, there could be several SvcV-3b DoDAF-
described Models. The suite of SvcV-3b DoDAF-described Models can be organized in a
number of ways (e.g., by domain, by operational mission phase, by solution option) to
emphasize the association of groups of resource pairs in context with the Architectural
Description purpose.
The SvcV-3b is generally presented as a matrix, where the Services resources are listed in
the rows and columns of the matrix, and each cell indicates an interaction between Services
if one exists. There are many types of information that can be presented in the cells of a
SvcV-3b. The resource interactions can be represented using different symbols and/or color
coding that depicts different interaction characteristics, for example:
Status (e.g., existing, planned, potential, de-activated).
Key interfaces.
Category (e.g., command and control, intelligence, personnel, logistics).
Classification-level (e.g., Restricted, Confidential, Secret, Top Secret).
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
177
=== page 178 ===
SvcV-3b: Services-Services Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-3b.html[3/3/2011 3:45:28 PM]
Communication means (e.g., Rim Loop Interface, Scalable Loop Interface).
DoDAF does not specify the symbols to be used. If symbols are used, a key for the symbols
is needed.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
178
=== page 179 ===
SvcV-4: Services Functionality Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-4.html[3/3/2011 3:45:30 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-4: Services Functionality Description
The SvcV-4 DoDAF-described Model addresses human and service functionality.
The primary purpose of SvcV-4 is to:
Develop a clear description of the necessary data flows that are input (consumed) by
and output (produced) by each resource.
Ensure that the service functional connectivity is complete (i.e., that a resource's
required inputs are all satisfied).
Ensure that the functional decomposition reaches an appropriate level of detail.
The Services Functionality Description provides detailed information regarding the:
Allocation of service functions to resources.
Flow of resources between service functions.
The SvcV-4 is the Services Viewpoint counterpart to the OV-5b Operational Activity Model of
the Operational Viewpoint.
The intended usage of the SvcV-4 includes:
Description of task workflow.
Identification of functional service requirements.
Functional decomposition of Services.
Relate human and service functions.
It is important to note that one usage of the SvcV-4 can support a net-centric (service-
oriented) implementation in describing the producing services and consuming services. The
Services Functionality Description information can support the registration of services in net-
centric (service-oriented) implementation.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-4 is used to specify the service functionality of resources in the architecture. The
SvcV-4 is the behavioral counterpart to the SvcV-1 Services Context Description (in the
same way that OV-5b Operational Activity Model is the behavioral counterpart to OV-2
Operational Resource Flow Description).
The scope of this model may be capability wide, without regard to which resources perform
which service functions, or it may be resource-specific. Variations may focus on intra- or
inter-resource data flows, or may simply allocate service functions to resources.
There are two basic ways to depict a SvcV-4:
The Taxonomic Service Functional Hierarchy shows a decomposition of service
functions depicted in a tree structure and is typically used where tasks are concurrent
but dependent, such as a production line, for example.
The Data Flow Diagram shows service functions connected by data flow arrows and
data stores.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
179
=== page 180 ===
SvcV-4: Services Functionality Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-4.html[3/3/2011 3:45:30 PM]
Within an Architectural Description, the SvcV-4 document service functions, the Resource
Flows between those service functions, the internal system data repositories or service data
stores, and the external sources and sinks for the service data flows, but not external to the
Architectural Description's scope. They may also show how users behave in relation to those
services.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
180
=== page 181 ===
SvcV-5: Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-5.html[3/3/2011 3:45:32 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-5: Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
The SvcV-5 addresses the linkage between service functions described in SvcV-4 and
Operational Activities specified in OV-5a Operational Activity Decomposition Tree or OV-5b
Operational Activity Model. The SvcV-5 depicts the mapping of service functions (and,
optionally, the capabilities and performers that provide them) to operational activities and
thus identifies the transformation of an operational need into a purposeful action performed
by a service solution.
During requirements definition, the SvcV-5 plays a particularly important role in tracing the
architectural elements associated with system function requirements to those associated
with user requirements.
The intended usage of the SvcV-5 includes:
Tracing service functional requirements to user requirements.
Tracing solution options to requirements.
Identification of overlaps or gaps.
Detailed Description:
An SvcV-5 is a specification of the relationships between the set of operational activities
applicable to an Architectural Description and the set of service functions applicable to that
Architectural Description. The relationship between operational activities and service
functions can also be expected to be many-to-many (i.e., one activity may be supported by
multiple functions, and one function may support multiple activities). The service functions
shown in the SvcV-5 may be those associated with capabilities and performers. More focused
SvcV-5 models might be used to specifically trace system functions to operational activities
if desired.
DoDAF uses the term Operational Activity in the OVs and the term Service Function in the
SVs to refer to essentially the same kind of thing-both activities and service functions are
tasks that are performed, accept inputs, and develop outputs. The distinction between an
Operational Activity and a Service Function is a question of what and how. The Operational
Activity is a specification of what is to be done, regardless of the mechanism used. A Service
Function specifies how a resource carries it out. For this reason, the SvcV-5 is a significant
model, as it ties together the logical specification in the OV-5a Operational Activity
Decomposition Tree or OV-5b Operational Activity Model with the physical specification of the
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description. Service Functions can be carried out by
Resources.
Care should be taken when publishing a SvcV-5 with status information. Any presentation
should clearly state the date of publication, so that users can see when status information is
old.
The SvcV-5 may be further annotated with Services, Capabilities, Performers executing
Activities, and capabilities and performers that conduct the functions.
The SvcV-5 is generally presented as a matrix of the relationship between service functions
and activities. The SvcV-5 can show requirements traceability with Operational Activities on
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
181
=== page 182 ===
SvcV-5: Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-5.html[3/3/2011 3:45:32 PM]
one axis of a matrix, the System Functions on the other axis, and with an X, date, or phase
in the intersecting cells, where appropriate.
An alternate version of the tabular SvcV-5 can allow the implementation status of each
function to be shown. In this variant model, each service function-to-operational activity
mapping is described by a traffic light symbol that may indicate the status of the service
support. DoDAF V2.0 does not prescribe a presentation technique. These symbols are usually
colored circles with the following possible representations:
Red may indicate that the functionality is planned but not developed.
Yellow may indicate that partial functionality has been provided (or full functionality
provided but system has not been fielded).
Green may indicate that full functionality has been provided to the field.
A blank cell may indicate that there is no service support planned for an Operational
Activity, or that a relationship does not exist between the Operational Activity and the
Service Function.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
182
=== page 183 ===
SvcV-6: Services Resource Flow Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-6.html[3/3/2011 3:45:35 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-6: Services Resource Flow Matrix
The SvcV-6 specifies the characteristics of the Service Resource Flows exchanged between
Services. The focus is on resource crossing the service boundary. The SvcV-6 focuses on the
specific aspects of the Service Resource Flow and the Service Resource Flow content in a
tabular format.
In addition, this model is useful in support of net-centric (service-oriented) implementation
of services. According to the Net-Centric Data Strategy, a net-centric implementation needs
to focus in on the data in the Service Resource Flow, as well as the services that produce or
consume the data of the Service Resource Flow. In a net-centric implementation, not all the
consumers are known and this model emphasizes the focus on the producer and Service
Resource Flow.
The intended usage of the SvcV-6 includes:
. Detailed definition of Resource Flows.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-6 specifies the characteristics of Service Resource Flow exchanges between
Services. The SvcV- is the physical equivalent of the logical OV-3 Operational Resource Flow
Matrix and provides detailed information on the service connections which implement the
Resource Flow exchanges specified in OV-3 Operational Resource Flow Matrix. Resource flow
exchange solutions, whether automated or not, e.g., such as verbal orders, are also
captured.
Service Resource Flow exchanges express the relationship across the three basic
architectural data elements of a SvcV (Services, service functions, and Service Resource
Flows) and focus on the specific aspects of the Service Resource Flow and the service
resource content. These aspects of the service Resource Flow exchange can be crucial to the
operational mission and are critical to understanding the potential for overhead and
constraints introduced by the physical aspects of the implementation such as security policy
and communications and logistics limitations.
The focus of SvcV-6 is on how the Service Resource Flow exchange is affected, in service-
specific details covering periodicity, timeliness, throughput, size, information assurance, and
security characteristics of the resource exchange. In addition, for Service Resource Flow of
data, their format and media type, accuracy, units of measurement, applicable system data
standards, and any DIV-3 Physical Data Models are also described or referenced in the
matrix.
Modeling discipline is needed to ensure that the architecture models are coherent. Each
Service Resource Flow exchange listed in the SvcV-6 table should be traceable to at least
one Operational Resource Flow exchanged listed in the corresponding OV-3 Operational
Resource Flow Matrix and these in turn trace to OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description.
It should be noted that each resource exchanged may relate to a known service function
(from SvcV-4) that produces or consumes it. However, there need not be a one-to-one
correlation between data elements listed in the SvcV-6 matrix and the Resource Flows
(inputs and outputs) that are produced or consumed in a related SvcV-4 because the SvcV-4
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
183
=== page 184 ===
SvcV-6: Services Resource Flow Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-6.html[3/3/2011 3:45:35 PM]
is more a logical solution, whereas the SvcV-6 is a more physical solution. In addition,
Resource flows between known service functions performed by the same Services may not
be shown in the SvcV-6 matrix. The SvcV-6 is about showing flows across service
boundaries or a service boundary. If the Resource Flow is information, it may need to be
reflected in the Data and Information Models.
The SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix builds on the SvcV-6 and should be developed at the
same time.
DoDAF does not prescribe the column headings in a SvcV-6 Matrix. Identifiers of the
operational Resource Flow exchanges (OV-3) that are implemented by the Service Resource
Flow Exchanges may be included in the table. All elements carried by the Resource Flow
exchanges may be shown.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
184
=== page 185 ===
SvcV-7: Services Measures Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-7.html[3/3/2011 3:45:37 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-7: Services Measures Matrix
The SvcV-7 depicts the measures (metrics) of resources. The Services Measures Matrix
expands on the information presented in a SvcV-1 Services Context Description by depicting
the characteristics of the resources in the SvcV-1 Services Context Description.
In addition, this model is useful in support of net-centric (service-oriented) implementation
of services. Service measures for Service Level Agreements for each service and may include
number of service consumers, service usage by consumers, and the minimum, average and
maximum response times, allowed down time, etc. Measures of interest for a Chief
Information Office or Program manager may include measures that assess service reuse,
process efficiency, and business agility.
The intended usage of the SvcV-7 includes:
Definition of performance characteristics and measures (metrics).
Identification of non-functional requirements.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-7 specifies qualitative and quantitative measures (metrics) of resources. It
specifies all of the measures. The measures are selected by the end user community and
described by the architect.
Performance parameters include all performance characteristics for which requirements can
be developed and specifications defined. The complete set of performance parameters may
not be known at the early stages of Architectural Description, so it is to be expected that this
model is updated throughout the specification, design, development, testing, and possibly
even its deployment and operations lifecycle phases. The performance characteristics are
captured in the Measures Meta-model group.
One of the primary purposes of SvcV-7 is to communicate which measures are considered
most crucial for the successful achievement of the mission goals assigned. These particular
measures can often be the deciding factors in acquisition and deployment decisions, and
figure strongly in services analysis and simulations done to support the acquisition decision
processes and system design refinement and be input or may impact decisions about Service
Level Agreement content. Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs) and Measures of Performers
(MOPs) are measures that can be captured and presented in the Services Measures Matrix
model.
SvcV-7 is typically a table, listing user defined measures (metrics) with a time period
association. It is sometimes useful to analyze evolution by comparing measures (metrics) for
current and future resources. For this reason, a hybrid SvcV-7 Model which spans
architectures across multiple phases may be useful.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
185
=== page 186 ===
SvcV-7: Services Measures Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-7.html[3/3/2011 3:45:37 PM]
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
186
=== page 187 ===
SvcV-8: Services Evolution Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-8.html[3/3/2011 3:45:40 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-8: Services Evolution Description
The SvcV-8 presents a whole lifecycle view of resources (services), describing how it
changes over time. It shows the structure of several resources mapped against a timeline.
In addition, this model is useful in support of net-centric (service-oriented) implementation
of services. This model can present a timeline of services evolve or are replaced over time,
including services that are internal and external to the scope of the architecture.
The intended usage of the SvcV-8 includes:
Development of incremental acquisition strategy.
Planning technology insertion.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-8, when linked together with other evolution Models such as CV-2 Capability
Taxonomy, CV-3 Capability Phasing and StdV-2 Standards Forecast, provides a rich
definition of how the Enterprise and its capabilities are expected to evolve over time. In this
manner, the model can be used to support an architecture evolution project plan or
transition plan.
A SvcV-8 can describe historical (legacy), current, and future capabilities against a timeline.
The model shows the structure of each resource, using similar modeling elements as those
used in SvcV-1. Interactions which take place within the resource may also be shown.
The changes depicted in the SvcV-8 DoDAF-described Model are derived from the project
milestones that are shown in a PV-2 Project Timelines model. When the PV-2 Project
Timelines model is used for capability acquisition projects, there is likely to be a close
relationship between these two models.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
187
=== page 188 ===
SvcV-8: Services Evolution Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-8.html[3/3/2011 3:45:40 PM]
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
188
=== page 189 ===
SvcV-9: Services Technology and Skills Forecast
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-9.html[3/3/2011 3:45:42 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-9: Services Technology and Skills Forecast
The SvcV-9 defines the underlying current and expected supporting technologies and skills.
Expected supporting technologies and skills are those that can be reasonably forecast given
the current state of technology and skills, and expected improvements or trends. New
technologies and skills are tied to specific time periods, which can correlate against the time
periods used in SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description model milestones and linked to
Capability Phases.
The SvcV-9 provides a summary of emerging technologies and skills that impact the
architecture. The SvcV-9 provides descriptions of relevant:
Emerging capabilities.
Industry trends.
Predictions (with associated confidence factors) of the availability and readiness of
specific hardware and software services.
Current and possible future skills.
In addition to providing an inventory of trends, capabilities and services, the SvcV-9 also
includes an assessment of the potential impact of these items on the architecture. Given the
future-oriented nature of this model, forecasts are typically made in short, mid and long-
term timeframes, such as 6, 12 and 18-month intervals.
In addition, this model is useful in support of net-centric (service-oriented) implementation
of services. As technologies change, like incorporation of Representational State Transfer
(REST) services in the Web Services Description Language, this model can present a timeline
of technologies related services over time.
The intended usage of the SvcV-9 includes:
Forecasting technology readiness against time.
HR Trends Analysis.
Recruitment Planning.
Planning technology insertion.
Input to options analysis.
The SvcV-9 can be presented in a table, timeline, or a Herringbone diagram.
Detailed Description:
A SvcV-9 summarizes predictions about trends in technology and personnel. Architects may
produce separate SvcV-9 products for technology and human resources. The specific time
periods selected (and the trends being tracked) can be coordinated with architecture
transition plans (which the SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description can support). That is,
insertion of new capabilities and upgrading or re-training of existing resources may depend
on or be driven by the availability of new technology and associated skills. The forecast
includes potential impacts on current architectures and thus influences the development of
transition and target architectures. The forecast is focused on technology and human
resource areas that are related to the purpose for which a given architecture is being
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
189
=== page 190 ===
SvcV-9: Services Technology and Skills Forecast
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-9.html[3/3/2011 3:45:42 PM]
described and identifies issues affecting that architecture.
If standards are an integral part of the technologies important to the evolution of a given
architecture, then it may be convenient to combine SvcV-9 with the StdV-2 Standards
Forecast into a composite Fit-for-Purpose View.
The SvcV-9 is constructed as part of a given Architectural Description and in accordance with
the its purpose. Typically, this involves starting with one or more overarching reference
models or standards profiles to which the architecture is subject to using. Using these
reference models or standards profiles, the architect selects the service areas and services
relevant to the architecture. The SvcV-9 forecasts relate to the StdV-1Standards Profile in
that a timed forecast may contribute to the decision to retire or phase out the use of a
certain standard in connection with a resource. Similarly, the SvcV-9 forecasts relate to the
StdV-2 Standards Forecasts in that a certain standard may be adopted depending on a
certain technology or skill becoming available (e.g., the availability of Java Script may
influence the decision to adopt a new HTML standard).
Alternatively, the SvcV-9 may relate forecasts to Service Model elements (e.g., Services)
where applicable. The list of resources potentially impacted by the forecasts can also be
summarized as additional information in SvcV-9.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
190
=== page 191 ===
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-10a.html[3/3/2011 3:45:45 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
The SvcV-10a is to specify functional and non-functional constraints on the implementation
aspects of the architecture (i.e., the structural and behavioral elements of the Services
Model).
The SvcV-10a describes constraints on the resources, functions, data and ports that make
up the Service Model physical architecture. The constraints are specified in text and may be
functional or structural (i.e., non-functional).
The intended usage of the SvcV-10a includes:
Definition of implementation logic.
Identification of resource constraints.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-10a describes the rules that control, constrain or otherwise guide the
implementation aspects of the architecture. Service Rules are statements that define or
constrain some aspect of the business, and may be applied to:
Performers.
Resource Flows.
Service Functions.
System Ports.
Data Elements.
In contrast to the OV-6a Operational Rules Model, the SvcV-10a focuses physical and data
constraints rather than business rules.
Constraints can be categorized as follows:
Structural Assertions - non-functional constraints governing some physical aspect of
the architecture.
Action Assertions - functional constraints governing the behavior of resources, their
interactions and Resource Flow exchanges.
Derivations - these involve algorithms used to compute facts.
Where a Service Rule is based on some standard, then that standard should be listed in the
StdV-1 Standards Profile.
Some Service Rules can be added as annotations to other models. The SvcV-10a then
should provide a listing of the complete set of rules with a reference to any models that they
affect.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
191
=== page 192 ===
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-10a.html[3/3/2011 3:45:45 PM]
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
192
=== page 193 ===
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-10b.html[3/3/2011 3:45:48 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
The SvcV-10b is a graphical method of describing a resource (or function) response to
various events by changing its state. The diagram basically represents the sets of events to
which the resources in the Activities respond (by taking an action to move to a new state)
as a function of its current state. Each transition specifies an event and an action.
The explicit time sequencing of service functions in response to external and internal events
is not fully expressed in SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description. SvcV-10b can be used to
describe the explicit sequencing of the service functions. Alternatively, SvcV-10b can be
used to reflect explicit sequencing of the actions internal to a single service function, or the
sequencing of service functions with respect to a specific resource.
The intended usage of the SvcV-10b includes:
Definition of states, events, and state transitions (behavioral modeling).
Identification of constraints.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-10b relates events to resource states and describes the transition from one state
to another.
The SvcV-10b is based on the statechart diagram. A state machine is defined as "a
specification that describes all possible behaviors of some dynamic view element. Behavior is
viewed as a traversal of a graph of specific states interconnected by one or more joined
transition arcs that are triggered by the dispatching of series of event instances. During this
traversal, the state machine executes a series of actions associated with various elements of
the state machine." Statechart diagrams can be unambiguously converted to structured
textual rules that specify timing aspects of events and the responses to these events, with
no loss of meaning. However, the graphical form of the state diagrams can often allow quick
analysis of the completeness of the rule set, and detection of dead ends or missing
conditions. These errors, if not detected early during the solution analysis phase, can often
lead to serious behavioral errors in fielded capabilities and to expensive correction efforts.
The SvcV-10b models state transitions from a resource perspective, with a focus on how the
resource responds to stimuli (e.g., triggers and events). As in the OV-6b Operational State
Transition Description, these responses may differ depending upon the rule set or conditions
that apply, as well as the resource's state at the time the stimuli is received. A change of
state is called a transition. Each transition specifies the response based on a specific event
and the current state. Actions may be associated with a given state or with the transition
between states. A state and its associated actions specify the response of a resource or
service function, to events. When an event occurs, the next state may vary depending on
the current state (and its associated action), the event, and the rule set or guard conditions.
The SvcV-10b can be used to describe the detailed sequencing of service functions described
in SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description. However, the relationship between the actions
included in SvcV-10b and the functions in SvcV-4 depends on the purposes of the
Architectural Description and the level of abstraction used in the models. The explicit
sequencing of functions in response to external and internal events is not fully expressed in
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
193
=== page 194 ===
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-10b.html[3/3/2011 3:45:48 PM]
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description. SvcV-10b can be used to reflect explicit
sequencing of the functions, the sequencing of actions internal to a single function, or the
sequencing of functions with respect to a specific resource.
States in a SvcV-10b model may be nested. This enables quite complex models to be
created to represent Services behavior. Depending upon the architecture project's needs, the
SvcV-10b may be used separately or in conjunction with the SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace
Description.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
194
=== page 195 ===
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-10c.html[3/3/2011 3:45:50 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Services Viewpoint
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
The SvcV-10c provides a time-ordered examination of the interactions between services
functional resources. Each event-trace diagram should have an accompanying description
that defines the particular scenario or situation. The SvcV-10c is valuable for moving to the
next level of detail from the initial solution design, to help define a sequence of service
functions and service data interfaces, and to ensure that each participating resource or
Service Port role has the necessary information it needs, at the right time, to perform its
assigned functionality.
The intended usage of the SvcV-10c includes:
Analysis of resource events impacting operation.
Behavioral analysis.
Identification of non-functional system requirements.
Detailed Description:
The SvcV-10c specifies the sequence in which Resource Flow elements are exchanged in
context of a resource or Service Port. Services Event-Trace Descriptions are sometimes
called sequence diagrams, event scenarios or timing diagrams. The components of a SvcV-
10c include functional resources or service ports, owning performer, as well as the port
which is the subject for the lifeline.
Specific points in time can be identified. The Resource Flow from one resource/port to
another can be labeled with events and their timing. The Service Event-Trace Description
provides a time-ordered examination of the Resource Flow elements exchanged between
participating resources (external and internal) or service ports. Each Event-Trace diagram
should have an accompanying description that defines the particular scenario or situation.
The SvcV-10c is typically used in conjunction with the SvcV-10b Services State Transition
Description to describe the dynamic behavior of resources. The data content of messages
that connect Resource Flows in a SvcV-10c model may be related, in modeling terms, with
Resource Flows (interactions, in SvcV-1 Services Context Description, SvcV-3a Systems-
Services Matrix, and SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix), Resource Flows (data, in SvcV-4
Services Functionality Description and SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix) and entities
(in DIV-3 Physical Data Model) modeled in other models.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description
SvcV-3a Systems-Services Matrix
SvcV-3b Services-Services Matrix
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to Services Traceability Matrix
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
195
=== page 196 ===
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/services-10c.html[3/3/2011 3:45:50 PM]
SvcV-7 Services Measures Matrix
SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast
SvcV-10abc Introduction to SvcV-10a, SvcV-10b and SvcV-10c
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model
SvcV-10b Services State Transition Description
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
196
=== page 197 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Standards Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/standards.html[3/3/2011 3:37:31 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Standards Viewpoint
The DoDAF-described Models within the Standards Viewpoint is the set of rules governing
the arrangement, interaction, and interdependence of parts or elements of the Architectural
Description. These sets of rules can be captured at the enterprise level and applied to each
solution, while each solution's architectural description depicts only those rules pertinent to
architecture described. Its purpose is to ensure that a solution satisfies a specified set of
operational or capability requirements. The Standards Models capture the doctrinal,
operational, business, technical, or industry implementation guidelines upon which
engineering specifications are based, common building blocks are established, and solutions
are developed. It includes a collection of the doctrinal, operational, business, technical, or
industry standards, implementation conventions, standards options, rules, and criteria that
can be organized into profiles that govern solution elements for a given architecture. Current
DoD guidance requires the Technical Standards portions of models be produced from DISR
to determine the minimum set of standards and guidelines for the acquisition of all DoD
systems that produce, use, or exchange information.
Standard Model Descriptions
Models Descriptions
StdV-1 Standards Profile The listing of standards that apply to solution
elements.
StdV-2 Standards Forecast The description of emerging standards and
potential impact on current solution elements,
within a set of time frames.
 
Uses of
 Standards Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models . The Standards Viewpoint can
articulate the applicable policy, standards, guidance, constraints, and forecasts required by
JCIDS, DAS, System Engineering, PPBE, Operations, other process owners, and decision-
makers.
Mappings of the Standards Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models to the DM2 Concepts,
Associations, and Attributes are in DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes Mapping
to DoDAF-described Models  and are described in the DoDAF Meta-model Data Dictionary .
 
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
197
=== page 198 ===
StdV-1: Standards Profile
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/STDV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:52 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Standards Viewpoint
StdV-1: Standards Profile
The StdV-1 defines the technical, operational, and business standards, guidance, and policy
applicable to the architecture being described. As well as identifying applicable technical
standards, the DoDAF V2.0 StdV-1 also documents the policies and standards that apply to
the operational or business context. The DISR is an architecture resource for technical
standards that can be used in the generation of the StdV-1 and StdV-2 Standards Forecast.
In most cases, building a Standards Profile consists of identifying and listing the applicable
portions of existing and emerging documentation. A StdV-1 should identify both existing
guidelines, as well as any areas lacking guidance. As with other models, each profile is
assigned a specific timescale (e.g., "As-Is", "To-Be", or transitional). Linking the profile to a
defined timescale enables the profile to consider both emerging technologies and any current
technical standards that are expected to be updated or become obsolete. If more than one
emerging standard time-period is applicable to an architecture, then a StdV-2 Standards
Forecast should be completed as well as a StdV-1.
The intended usage of the StdV-1 includes:
Application of standards (informing project strategy).
Standards compliance.
Detailed Description:
The StdV-1 collates the various systems and services, standards, and rules that implement
and constrain the choices that can be or were made in the design and implementation of an
Architectural Description. It delineates the systems, services, Standards, and rules that
apply. The technical standards govern what hardware and software may be implemented and
on what system. The standards that are cited may be international such as ISO standards,
national standards, or organizational specific standards.
With associated standards with other elements of the architecture, a distinction is made
between applicability and conformance. If a standard is applicable to a given architecture,
that architecture need not be fully conformant with the standard. The degree of conformance
to a given standard may be judged based on a risk assessment at each approval point.
Note that an association between a Standard and an architectural element should not be
interpreted as indicating that the element is fully compliant with that Standard. Further
detail would be needeed to confirm the level of compliance.
Standards Profiles for a particular architecture must maintain full compatibility with the root
standards they have been derived from. In addition, the StdV-1 model may state a particular
method of implementation for a Standard, as compliance with a Standard does not ensure
interoperability. The Standards cited are referenced as relationships to the systems, services,
system functions, service functions, system data, service data, hardware/software items or
communication protocols, where applicable, in:
SV-1 Systems Interface Description.
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description.
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
198
=== page 199 ===
StdV-1: Standards Profile
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/STDV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:52 PM]
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix.
SvcV-1 Services Context Description.
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description.
SvcV-4 Services Functionality Description.
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix.
DIV-2 Logical Data Model.
DIV-3 Physical Data Model.
That is, each standard listed in the profile is associated with the elements that implement or
use the standard.
The protocols referred to Resource Flow descriptions (see SV-2 Systems Resource Flow
Description or SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description) are examples of Standards and
these should also be included in the StdV-1 listing, irrespective of which models they appear
in or are referred from.
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
199
=== page 200 ===
StdV-2: Standards Forecast
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/STDV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:45:55 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Standards Viewpoint
StdV-2: Standards Forecast
The StdV-2 contains expected changes in technology-related standards, operational
standards, or business standards and conventions, which are documented in the StdV-1
model. The forecast for evolutionary changes in the standards need to be correlated against
the time periods mentioned in the SV-8 Systems Evolution Description, SvcV-8 Services
Evolution Description, SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast, and SvcV-9 Services
Technology & Skills Forecast models.
A StdV-2 is a detailed description of emerging standards relevant to the systems,
operational, and business activities covered by the Architectural Description. The forecast
should be tailored to focus on areas that are related to the purpose for which a given
Architectural Description is being built, and should identify issues that affect the architecture.
A StdV-2 complements and expands on the StdV-1Standards Profile model and should be
used when more than one emerging standard time-period is applicable to the architecture.
One of the prime purposes of this model is to identify critical technology standards, their
fragility, and the impact of these standards on the future development and maintainability of
the architecture and its constituent elements.
The intended usage of the StdV-2 includes:
Forecasting future changes in standards (informing project strategy).
Detailed Description:
The Standards Forecast DoDAF-described Model contains expected changes in standards and
conventions, which are documented in the StdV-1 model. The forecast for evolutionary
changes in the standards need to be correlated against the time periods mentioned in the
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description, SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description, SV-9 Systems
Technology & Skills Forecast, and SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast models. One
of the prime purposes of this model is to identify critical standards, their life expectancy, and
the impact of these standards on the future development and maintainability of the
Architectural Description and its constituent elements.
StdV-2 lists emerging or evolving standards relevant to the solutions covered by the
Architectural Description. It contains predictions about the availability of emerging standards,
and relates these predictions to the elements and the time periods that are listed in the SV-8
Systems Evolution Description, SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description, SV-9 Systems
Technology & Skills Forecast, and SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast models.
The specific time periods selected (e.g., 6-month and 12-month intervals) and the standards
being tracked are coordinated with architecture transition plans (which the SV-8 Systems
Evolution Description and SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description can support). That is,
insertion of new capabilities and upgrading of existing solutions may depend on, or be driven
by, the availability of new standards and models incorporating those standards. The forecast
specifies potential standards and thus impacts current architectures and influences the
development of transition and objective (i.e., target) architectures. The forecast is tailored to
focus on standards areas that are related to the purpose for which a given architecture is
being described and should identify potential standards affecting that architecture. If
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
200
=== page 201 ===
StdV-2: Standards Forecast
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/STDV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:45:55 PM]
interface standards are an integral part of the technologies important to the evolution of a
given architecture, then it may be convenient to combine StdV-2 with SV-9 Systems
Technology & Skills Forecast or SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast into a
composite Fit-for-Purpose View. For other projects, it may be convenient to combine all the
standards information into one composite Fit-for-Purpose View, combining StdV-2 with StdV-
1 Standard Profile.
StdV-2 delineates the standards that potentially impact the relevant system and service
elements (from SV-1 Systems Interface Description, SV-2 Systems Resource Flow
Description, SV-4 Systems Functionality Description, SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix,
SvcV-1 Services Context Description, SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow Description, SvcV-4
Services Functionality Description, SV-6 Services Resource Flow Matrix, and DIV-2 Logical
Data Model) and relates them to the time periods that are listed in the SV-8 Systems
Evolution Description, SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description, SV-9 Systems Technology &
Skills Forecast, and SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast models. A system's
evolution, specified in SV-8 Systems Evolution Description, or service's evolutions, specified
in SvcV-8 Services Evolution Description, may be tied to a future standard listed in StdV-2.
A timed technology and skills forecast from SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast or
SvcV-9 Services Technology & Skills Forecast models is related to StdV-2 standards forecast
in the following manner: a certain technology may be dependent on a StdV-2 standard (i.e.,
a standard listed in StdV-2 may not be adopted until a certain technology becomes
available). This is how a prediction on the adoption of a future standard, may be related to
standards listed in StdV-1 through the SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast or SvcV-9
Services Technology & Skills Forecast models.
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
201
=== page 202 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Systems Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/systems.html[3/3/2011 3:37:34 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
The DoDAF-described Models within the Systems Viewpoint describes systems and
interconnections providing for, or supporting, DoD functions. DoD functions include both
warfighting and business functions. The Systems Models associate systems resources to the
operational and capability requirements. These systems resources support the operational
activities and facilitate the exchange of information. The Systems DoDAF-described Models
are available for support of legacy systems. As architectures are updated, they should
transition from Systems to Services and utilize the models within the Services Viewpoint.
Names of the models and their descriptions (in the table below) are provided below.
Systems Model Descriptions
Models Descriptions
SV-1 Systems Interface Description The identification of systems, system items, and
their interconnections.
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow
Description
A description of Resource Flows exchanged
between systems.
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix The relationships among systems in a given
Architectural Description. It can be designed to
show relationships of interest, (e.g., system-type
interfaces, planned vs. existing interfaces).
SV-4 Systems Functionality
Description
The functions (activities) performed by systems
and the system data flows among system functions
(activities).
SV-5a Operational Activity to
Systems Function Traceability Matrix
A mapping of system functions (activities) back to
operational activities (activities).
SV-5b Operational Activity to
Systems Traceability Matrix
A mapping of systems back to capabilities or
operational activities (activities).
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix Provides details of system resource flow elements
being exchanged between systems and the
attributes of that exchange.
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix The measures (metrics) of Systems Model
elements for the appropriate timeframe(s).
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description The planned incremental steps toward migrating a
suite of systems to a more efficient suite, or
toward evolving a current system to a future
implementation.
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills
Forecast
The emerging technologies, software/hardware
products, and skills that are expected to be
available in a given set of time frames and that will
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
202
=== page 203 ===
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models - Systems Viewpoint
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/systems.html[3/3/2011 3:37:34 PM]
affect future system development.
SV-10a Systems Rules Model One of three models used to describe system
functionality. It identifies constraints that are
imposed on systems functionality due to some
aspect of system design or implementation.
SV-10b Systems State Transition
Description
One of three models used to describe system
functionality. It identifies responses of systems to
events.
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace
Description
One of three models used to describe system
functionality. It identifies system-specific
refinements of critical sequences of events
described in the Operational Viewpoint.
 
Uses of
 System Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models . Within the development process,
the DoDAF-described Models describe the design for system-based solutions to support or
enable requirements created by the operational development processes (JCIDS) and Defense
Acquisition System.
Mappings of the Systems Viewpoint DoDAF-described Models, to the DM2 Concepts,
Associations, and Attributes are in DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes Mapping
to DoDAF-described Models . The DM2 Concepts, Associations, and Attributes are
described in the DoDAF Meta-model Data Dictionary .
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
203
=== page 204 ===
SV-1: Systems Interface Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:58 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-1: Systems Interface Description
The SV-1 addresses the composition and interaction of Systems. For DoDAF V2.0, the SV-1
incorporates the human elements as types of Performers - Organizations and Personnel
Types.
The SV-1 links together the operational and systems architecture models by depicting how
Resources are structured and interact to realize the logical architecture specified in an OV-2
Operational Resource Flow Description. A SV-1 may represent the realization of a
requirement specified in an OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description (i.e., in a "To-Be"
architecture), and so there may be many alternative SV models that could realize the
operational requirement. Alternatively, in an "As-Is" architecture, the OV-2 Operational
Resource Flow Description may simply be a simplified, logical representation of the SV-1 to
allow communication of key Resource Flows to non-technical stakeholders.
A System Resource Flow is a simplified representation of a pathway or network pattern,
usually depicted graphically as a connector (i.e., a line with possible amplifying information).
The SV-1 depicts all System Resource Flows between Systems that are of interest. Note that
Resource Flows between Systems may be further specified in detail in SV-2 Systems
Resource Flow Description and SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix.
Sub-System assemblies may be identified in SV-1 to any level (i.e., depth) of decomposition
the architect sees fit. SV-1 may also identify the Physical Assets (e.g., Platforms) at which
Resources are deployed, and optionally overlay Operational Activities and Locations that
utilize those Resources. In many cases, an operational activity and locations depicted in an
OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description model may well be the logical representation of
the resource that is shown in SV-1.
The intended usage of the SV-1 includes:
Definition of System concepts.
Definition of System options.
System Resource Flow requirements capture.
Capability integration planning.
System integration management.
Operational planning (capability and performer definition).
The SV-1 is used in two complementary ways:
Describe the Resource Flows exchanged between resources in the architecture.
Describe a solution, or solution option, in terms of the components of capability and
their physical integration on platforms and other facilities.
Detailed Description:
A SV-1 can be used simply to depict Systems and sub-systems and identify the Resource
Flows between them. The real benefit of a SV-1 is its ability to show the human aspects of
an architecture, and how these interact with Systems. In addition, DoDAF has the concept of
Capability and Performers (see Capability Meta-model group in Section 2) which is used to
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
204
=== page 205 ===
SV-1: Systems Interface Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:58 PM]
gather together systems, assets and people into a configuration, which can meet a specific
capability. A primary purpose of a SV-1 DoDAF-described Model is to show resource
structure, i.e., identify the primary sub-systems, performer and activities (functions) and
their interactions. SV-1 contributes to user understanding of the structural characteristics of
the capability.
The physical resources contributing to a capability are either an organizational resource or a
physical asset, i.e., a system cannot contribute alone (it must be hosted on a physical asset
used by an organizational resource of both). Organizational aspects can now be shown on
SV-1 (e.g., who uses System). Resource structures may be identified in SV-1 to any level
(i.e., depth) of decomposition the architect sees fit. DoDAF does not specifically use terms
such as, sub-System and component as these terms often denote a position relative to a
structural hierarchy. Any System may combine hardware and software or these can be
treated as separate (sub) Systems. DoDAF V2.0 includes human factors (as Personnel Types
and a type of Performer). Should an architect wish to describe a System which has human
elements, then Systems, Personnel Types and Performers should be used to wrap the human
and system elements together.
A SV-1 can optionally be annotated with Operational Activities, Capabilities, and/or Locations
originally specified in OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description model. In this way,
traceability can be established from the logical OV structure to the physical System
Viewpoint structure. If possible, a SV-1 shows Systems, Physical Assets and System
interfaces for the entire Architectural Description on the same diagram. If a single SV-1 is
not possible, the resource of interest should be decomposed into multiple SV-1 models.
Functions (Activities):
Some Resources can carry out System Functions (Activities) as described in SV-4 Systems
Functionality Description model and these functions can optionally be overlaid on a SV-1. In
a sense, the SV-1 and the SV-4 Systems Functionality Description model provide
complementary representations (structure and function). Either could be modeled first, but
usually an iterative approach is used to model these together gradually building up the level
of detail in the System description. Note that the same type (class) of resource may be used
in different contexts in a given SV-1. For this reason, the tracing of functions to resources is
specified in context of their usage (see DM2 for details).
Resource Flows in SV-1:
In addition to depicting Systems (Performers) and their structure, the SV-1 addresses
Resource Flows. A Resource Flow, as depicted in SV-1, is an indicator that resources pass
between one System and the other. In the case of Systems, this can be expanded into
further detail in SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description.
Interactions are only possible between Systems and Services. System Resource Flows
provide a specification for how the operational Resource Flows Exchanges specified in
Needlines (in the OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description model) are realized with
Systems. A single Needline shown in the OV-2 Operational Resource Flow Description model
may translate into multiple System Resource Flows.
The actual implementation of a System Resource Flow may take more than one form (e.g.,
multiple physical links). Details of the physical pathways or network patterns that implement
the interfaces are documented in SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description. System
Resource Flows are summarized in a SV-3b Systems-Systems Matrix. The functions
performed by the resources are specified in a SV-4 System Functionality Description, but
may optionally be overlaid on the Resources in a SV-1.
An Operational Viewpoint (OV) suite may specify a set of requirements - either as a specific
operational plan, or a scenario for procurement. As OV-2 Operational Resource Flow
Description, OV-5a Operational Activity Decomposition Tree, and OV-5b Operational Activity
Model specify the logical structure and behavior, SV-1 and SV-4 Systems Functionality
Description specify the physical structure and behavior (to the level of detail required by the
architectural stakeholders). This separation of logical and physical presents an opportunity
205
=== page 206 ===
SV-1: Systems Interface Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-1.html[3/3/2011 3:45:58 PM]
for carrying out architectural trade studies based on the architectural content in the DoDAF-
described Models.
The structural and behavioral models in the OVs and SVs allow architects and stakeholders
to quickly ascertain which functions are carried out by humans and which by Systems for
each alternative specification and so carry out trade analysis based on risk, cost, reliability,
etc.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
206
=== page 207 ===
SV-2: Systems Resource Flow Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:46:02 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-2: Systems Resource Flow Description
A SV-2 specifies the System Resource Flows between Systems and may also list the protocol
stacks used in connections.
A SV-2 DoDAF-described Model is used to give a precise specification of a connection
between Systems. This may be an existing connection, or a specification for a connection
that is to be made.
The intended usage of the SV-2 includes:
Resource Flow specification.
Detailed Description:
A SV-2 comprises Systems, their ports, and the Resource Flows between those ports. The
architect may choose to create a diagram for each Resource Flow for all Systems or to show
all the Resource Flows on one diagram if possible.
Each SV-2 model can show:
Which ports are connected?
The Systems that the ports belong to.
The definition of the System Resource Flow in terms of the physical/logical
connectivity and any protocols that are used in the connection.
Note that networks are represented as Systems. The architect may choose to show other
Systems being components of the network, i.e., if they are part of the network
infrastructure.
Any protocol referred to in a SV-2 diagram needs to be defined in the StdV-1 Standards
Profile.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
207
=== page 208 ===
SV-2: Systems Resource Flow Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-2.html[3/3/2011 3:46:02 PM]
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
208
=== page 209 ===
SV-3: Systems-Systems Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:46:04 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-3: Systems-Systems Matrix
A SV-3 enables a quick overview of all the system resource interactions specified in one or
more SV-1 Systems Interface Description models. The SV-3 provides a tabular summary of
the system interactions specified in the SV-1 Systems Interface Description model for the
Architectural Description. The matrix format supports a rapid assessment of potential
commonalities and redundancies (or, if fault-tolerance is desired, the lack of redundancies).
The SV-3 can be organized in a number of ways to emphasize the association of groups of
system pairs in context with the architecture's purpose.
The intended usage of the SV-3 includes:
Summarizing system resource interactions.
Interface management.
Comparing interoperability characteristics of solution options.
Detailed Description:
The SV-1 concentrates on System resources and their interactions, and these are
summarized in a SV-3. The SV-3 can be a useful tool for managing the evolution of solutions
and infrastructures, the insertion of new technologies and functionality, and the
redistribution of systems and activities in context with evolving operational requirements.
Depending upon the purpose of the Architectural Description, there could be several SV-3s.
The suite of SV-3 models can be organized in a number of ways (e.g., by domain, by
operational mission phase, by solution option) to emphasize the association of groups of
resource pairs in context with the Architectural Description purpose.
The SV-3 is generally presented as a matrix, where the Systems resources are listed in the
rows and columns of the matrix, and each cell indicates an interaction between resources if
one exists. Many types of interaction information can be presented in the cells of a SV-3.
The resource interactions can be represented using different symbols and/or color coding
that depicts different interaction characteristics, for example:
Status (e.g., existing, planned, potential, de-activated).
Key interfaces.
Category (e.g., command and control, intelligence, personnel, logistics).
Classification-level (e.g., Restricted, Confidential, Secret, Top Secret).
Communication means (e.g., Rim Loop Interface, Scalable Loop Interface).
DoDAF does not specify the symbols to be used. If symbols are used, a key is needed.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
209
=== page 210 ===
SV-3: Systems-Systems Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-3.html[3/3/2011 3:46:04 PM]
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
210
=== page 211 ===
SV-4: Systems Functionality Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-4.html[3/3/2011 3:46:07 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-4: Systems Functionality Description
The SV-4 addresses human and system functionality.
The primary purposes of SV-4 are to:
. Develop a clear description of the necessary data flows that are input (consumed) by and
output (produced) by each resource. . Ensure that the functional connectivity is complete
(i.e., that a resource's required inputs are all satisfied). . Ensure that the functional
decomposition reaches an appropriate level of detail.
The Systems Functionality Description provides detailed information regarding the:
. Allocation of functions to resources. . Flow of resources between functions.
The SV-4 is the Systems Viewpoint model counterpart to the OV-5b Activity Model of the
Operational Viewpoint.
The intended usage of the SV-4 includes:
Description of task workflow.
Identification of functional system requirements.
Functional decomposition of systems.
Relate human and system functions.
Detailed Description:
The SV-4 is used to specify the functionality of resources in the architecture (in this case,
functional resources, systems, performer and capabilities). The SV-4 is the behavioral
counterpart to the SV-1 Systems Interface Description (in the same way that OV-5b
Operational Activity Model is the behavioral counterpart to OV-2 Operational Resource Flow
Matrix).
The scope of this model may be capability wide, without regard to which resources perform
which functions, or it may be resource-specific. Variations may focus on intra- or inter-
resource data flows, or may simply allocate functions to resources.
There are two basic ways to depict SV-4:
The Taxonomic Functional Hierarchy shows a decomposition of functions depicted in a
tree structure and is typically used where tasks are concurrent but dependent, such as
a production line, for example.
The Data Flow Diagram shows functions connected by data flow arrows and data
stores.
The Taxonomic Functional Hierarchy may be particularly useful in capability-based
procurement where it is necessary to model the functions that are associated with particular
capability (see SV-5).
Within an Architectural Description, the SV-4 documents system functions, the Resource
Flows between those functions, the internal system data repositories or system data stores,
and the external producers and consumers for the system data flows, but not those external
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
211
=== page 212 ===
SV-4: Systems Functionality Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-4.html[3/3/2011 3:46:07 PM]
to the Architectural Description scope. They may also show how users behave in relation to
those systems.
The functions are likely to be related to Operational Activities captured in OV-5a. Although
there is a correlation between the Operational Activity Model (OV-5b) and the functional
hierarchy of SV-4, it need not be a one-to-one mapping, hence, the need for the Function
to Operational Activity Traceability Matrix (SV-5), which provides that mapping.
Systems are not limited to internal system functions and can include HCI and GUI functions
or functions that consume or produce system data. The external system data producers or
consumers can be used to represent the human that interacts with the system. The System
Resource Flows between the external system data source/sink (representing the human or
system) and the HCI, GUI, or interface function can be used to represent human-system
interactions, or system-system interfaces. Standards that apply to system functions, such as
HCI and GUI standards, are also specified during development of this model (and recorded in
StdV-1).
A graphical variant of the SV-4 Data Flow model may be used with swim lanes. A system
swim lane may be associated with:
A System.
A grouping of Capabilities and System Functions (usually based on a Physical Asset).
A Performer executing an Activity.
Swim lanes are presented either vertically or horizontally. A function can be placed in the
swim lane associated with the System, Resources or Performer executing an Activity that it
is allocated in the solution architecture. This provides a graphical means of presenting the
interactions between Systems or Capabilities (shown through system connections on SV-1)
in functional terms. This is a powerful technique for visualizing the differences between
alternative solution options (which may have a common set of functions).
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
212
=== page 213 ===
SV-5a: Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-5a.html[3/3/2011 3:46:10 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-5a: Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
The SV-5a addresses the linkage between System Functions described in SV-4 Systems
Functionality Description and Operational Activities specified in OV-5a Operational Activity
Decomposition Tree or OV-5b Operational Activity Model. The SV-5a depicts the mapping of
system functions and, optionally, the capabilities and performers that provide them to
operational activities. The SV-5a identifies the transformation of an operational need into a
purposeful action performed by a system or solution.
During requirements definition, the SV-5a plays a particularly important role in tracing the
architectural elements associated with system function requirements to those associated
with user requirements.
The intended usage of the SV-5a includes:
Tracing functional system requirements to user requirements.
Tracing solution options to requirements.
Identification of overlaps or gaps.
Detailed Description:
An SV-5a is a specification of the relationships between the set of operational activities
applicable to an Architectural Description and the set of system functions applicable to that
Architectural Description. The relationship between operational activities and system
functions can also be expected to be many-to-many (i.e., one activity may be supported by
multiple functions, and one function may support multiple activities). The system functions
shown in the SV-5a may be those associated with capabilities and performers. More focused
SV-5a models might be used to specifically trace system functions to operational activities if
desired.
DoDAF uses the term Operational Activity in the OVs and the term System Function in the
SVs to refer to essentially the same kind of thing; both activities and functions are tasks
that are performed, accept inputs, and develop outputs. The distinction between an
Operational Activity and a Function is a question of what and how. The Operational Activity
is a specification of what is to be done, regardless of the mechanism used. A System
Function is specifies how a resource carries it out. For this reason, SV-5a is a significant
model, as it ties together the logical specification in the OV-5a with the physical specification
of the SV-4 Systems Functionality Description. System Functions can be carried out by
Functional Resources (systems, performers executing activities, and performers).
The SV-5a is generally presented as a matrix of the relationship between system functions
and operational activities. The SV-5a can show requirements traceability with Operational
Activities on one axis of a matrix, the System Functions on the other axis, and with an X,
date, or phase in the intersecting cells, where appropriate.
An alternate version of the tabular SV-5a can allow the implementation status of each
function to be shown. In this variant model, each system function-to-operational activity
mapping is described by a traffic light symbol that may indicate the status of the system
support. DoDAF V2.0 does not prescribe a presentation technique. These symbols are usually
colored circles with the following possible representations:
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
213
=== page 214 ===
SV-5a: Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-5a.html[3/3/2011 3:46:10 PM]
Red may indicate that the functionality is planned but not developed.
Yellow may indicate that partial functionality has been provided (or full functionality
provided but system has not been fielded).
Green may indicate that full functionality has been provided to the field.
A blank cell may indicate that there is no system support planned for an Operational
Activity, or that a relationship does not exist between the Operational Activity and the
System Function.
Care should be taken when publishing a SV-5a with status information. Any presentation
should clearly state the date of publication, so that users can see when status information is
old.
SV-5a may be further annotated with Systems, Capabilities, Performers executing Activities,
and capabilities and performers that conduct the functions.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
214
=== page 215 ===
SV-5b: Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-5b.html[3/3/2011 3:46:12 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-5b: Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
The SV-5b addresses the linkage between described in SV-1 Systems Functionality
Description and Operational Activities specified in OV-5a Operational Activity Decomposition
Tree or OV-5b Operational Activity Model. The SV-5b depicts the mapping of systems and,
optionally, the capabilities and performers that provide them to operational activities. The
SV-5b identifies the transformation of an operational need into a purposeful action
performed by a system or solution.
During requirements definition, the SV-5b plays a particularly important role in tracing the
architectural elements associated with system requirements to those associated with user
requirements.
The intended usage of the SV-5b includes:
Tracing system requirements to user requirements.
Tracing solution options to requirements.
Identification of overlaps or gaps.
Detailed Description:
An SV-5b is a specification of the relationships between the set of operational activities
applicable to an Architectural Description and the set of systems applicable to that
Architectural Description. The relationship between operational activities and systems can
also be expected to be many-to-many (i.e., one activity may be supported by multiple
systems, and one system may support multiple activities). The system shown in the SV-5b
may be those associated with resources. More focused SV-5b models might be used to
specifically trace system to operational activities if desired.
The SV-5b is generally presented as a matrix of the relationship between systems and
activities and can be a summary of the Operational Activity to System Function Traceability
Matrix (SV-5a). The SV-5b can show requirements traceability with Operational Activities on
one axis of a matrix, the System Functions on the other axis, and with an X, date, or phase
in the intersecting cells, where appropriate.
An alternate version of the tabular SV-5b model can allow the implementation status of each
system to be shown. In this variant model, each system-to-operational activity mapping is
described by a traffic light symbol that may indicate the status of the system support.
DoDAF V2.0 does not prescribe a presentation technique. These symbols are usually colored
circles with the following possible representations:
Red may indicate that the system is planned but not developed.
Yellow may indicate that partial system functionality has been provided (or full
functionality provided but system has not been fielded).
Green may indicate that full system functionality has been provided to the field.
A blank cell may indicate that there is no system support planned for an Operational
Activity, or that a relationship does not exist between the Operational Activity and the
System Function.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
215
=== page 216 ===
SV-5b: Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-5b.html[3/3/2011 3:46:12 PM]
Care should be taken when publishing a SV-5b with status information. Any presentation
should clearly state the date of publication, so that users can see when status information is
old.
The SV-5b may be further annotated with Capabilities, Performers executing Activities, and
capabilities and performers that conduct the functions. This can be used to identify which
systems can support a particular capability. The architect may also wish to hide the systems
in a SV-5b so that the table simply shows the mapping from performers executing activities,
and capabilities and performers to Operational Activities.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
216
=== page 217 ===
SV-6: Systems Resource Flow Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-6.html[3/3/2011 3:46:15 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-6: Systems Resource Flow Matrix
The SV-6 specifies the characteristics of the System Resource Flows exchanged between
systems with emphasis on resources crossing the system boundary.
The SV-6 focuses on the specific aspects of the system Resource Flow and the system
Resource Flow content in a tabular format.
The intended usage of the SV-6 includes:
Detailed definition of Resource Flows.
Detailed Description:
The SV-6 specifies the characteristics of Resource Flow exchanges between systems. The
SV-6 is the physical equivalent of the logical OV-3 table and provides detailed information on
the system connections which implement the Resource Flow exchanges specified in OV-3.
Non-automated Resource Flow exchanges, such as verbal orders, are also captured.
System Resource Flow exchanges express the relationship across the three basic
architectural data elements of a SV (systems, system functions, and system Resource Flows)
and focus on the specific aspects of the System Resource Flow and the system resource
content. These aspects of the System Resource Flow exchange can be crucial to the
operational mission and are critical to understanding the potential for overhead and
constraints introduced by the physical aspects of the implementation such as security policy
and communications limitations.
The focus of SV-6 is on how the System Resource Flow exchange is affected, in system-
specific details covering periodicity, timeliness, throughput, size, information assurance, and
security characteristics of the resource exchange. In addition, the System Resource Flow
elements, their format and media type, accuracy, units of measurement, and system data
standard are also described in the matrix.
Modeling discipline is needed to ensure that the architecture models are coherent. Each
system Resource Flow exchange listed in the SV-6 table should be traceable to at least one
operational Resource Flow exchanged listed in the corresponding OV-3 Operational Resource
Flow Matrix and these, in turn, trace to operation Resource Flows in the OV-2 Operational
Resource Flow Description.
It should be noted that each data element exchanged may be related to the system function
(from SV-4) that produces or consumes it. However, there need not be a one-to-one
correlation between data elements listed in the SV-6 matrix and the data flows (inputs and
outputs) that are produced or consumed in a related SV-4 Services Functionality Description.
In addition, Data flows between system functions performed by the same systems may not
be shown in the SV-6 matrix. SV-6 is about showing flows across system boundaries.
The SV-7 System Measures Matrix model builds on the SV-6 and should be developed at the
same time.
DoDAF does not prescribe the column headings in a SV-6 Matrix. Identifiers of the
operational Resource Flows from the OV-3 Operational Resource Flow Matrix that are
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
217
=== page 218 ===
SV-6: Systems Resource Flow Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-6.html[3/3/2011 3:46:15 PM]
implemented by the System Resource Flow Exchanges may be included in the table. All
elements carried by the Resource Flow exchanges may be also shown.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
218
=== page 219 ===
SV-7: Systems Measures Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-7.html[3/3/2011 3:46:18 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-7: Systems Measures Matrix
The SV-7 depicts the measures (metrics) of resources. The Systems Measures Matrix
expands on the information presented in a SV-1 by depicting the characteristics of the
resources in the SV-1.
The intended usage of the SV-7 includes:
Definition of performance characteristics and measures (metrics).
Identification of non-functional requirements.
Detailed Description:
The SV-7 specifies qualitative and quantitative measures (metrics) of resources; it specifies
all of the measures. The measures are selected by the end user community and described by
the architect.
Performance parameters include all performance characteristics for which requirements can
be developed and specifications defined. The complete set of performance parameters may
not be known at the early stages of Architectural Description, so it is to be expected that this
model is updated throughout the specification, design, development, testing, and possibly
even its deployment and operations lifecycle phases. The performance characteristics are
captured in the Measures Meta-model group.
One of the primary purposes of SV-7 is to communicate which measures are considered
most crucial for the successful achievement of the mission goals assigned and how those
performance parameters will be met. These particular measures can often be the deciding
factors in acquisition and deployment decisions, and figures strongly in systems analysis and
simulations done to support the acquisition decision processes and system design
refinement. Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs) and Measures of Performers (MOPs) are
measures that can be captured and presented in the Services Measures Matrix model.
The SV-7 DoDAF-described Model is typically a table listing user defined measures (metrics)
with a time period association. It is sometimes useful to analyze evolution by comparing
measures (metrics) for current and future resources. For this reason, a hybrid SV-7 model
which spans architectures across multiple phases may be useful.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
219
=== page 220 ===
SV-7: Systems Measures Matrix
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-7.html[3/3/2011 3:46:18 PM]
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
220
=== page 221 ===
SV-8: Systems Evolution Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-8.html[3/3/2011 3:46:20 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-8: Systems Evolution Description
The SV-8 presents a whole lifecycle view of resources (systems), describing how they
change over time. It shows the structure of several resources mapped against a timeline.
The intended usage of the SV-8 includes:
Development of incremental acquisition strategy.
Planning technology insertion.
Detailed Description:
The SV-8, when linked together with other evolution Models, e.g., such as CV-3 Capability
Phasing and StdV-2 Standards Forecast, provides a rich definition of how the Enterprise and
its capabilities are expected to evolve over time. In this manner, the model can be used to
support an architecture evolution project plan or transition plan.
A SV-8 can either describe historical (legacy), current, and future capabilities against a
timeline. The model shows the structure of each resource, using similar modeling elements
as those used in SV-1. Interactions which take place within the resource may also be shown.
The changes depicted in the SV-8 are derived from the project milestones that are shown in
a PV-2 Project Timelines. When the PV-2 Project Timelines is used for capability acquisition
projects, there is likely to be a close relationship between these two models.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
221
=== page 222 ===
SV-8: Systems Evolution Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-8.html[3/3/2011 3:46:20 PM]
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
222
=== page 223 ===
SV-9: Systems Technology and Skills Forecast
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-9.html[3/3/2011 3:46:23 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-9: Systems Technology and Skills Forecast
The SV-9 defines the underlying current and expected supporting technologies and skills.
Expected supporting technologies and skills are those that can be reasonably forecast given
the current state of technology and skills as well as the expected improvements or trends.
New technologies and skills are tied to specific time periods, which can correlate against the
time periods used in SV-8 milestones and linked to Capability Phases.
The SV-9 provides a summary of emerging technologies and skills that impact the
architecture. The SV-9 provides descriptions of relevant:
Emerging capabilities.
Industry trends.
Predictions (with associated confidence factors) of the availability and readiness of
specific hardware and software systems.
Current and possible future skills.
In addition to providing an inventory of trends, capabilities and systems, the DoDAF-
described Model SV-9 also includes an assessment of the potential impact of these items on
the architecture. Given the future-oriented nature of this model, forecasts are typically made
in short, mid and long-term timeframes, such as 6, 12 and 18-month intervals.
The intended usage of the SV-9 includes:
Forecasting technology readiness against time.
HR Trends Analysis.
Recruitment Planning.
Planning technology insertion.
Input to options analysis.
The SV-9 can be presented in a table, timeline, or a Herringbone diagram.
Detailed Description:
A SV-9 summarizes predictions about trends in technology and personnel. Architects may
produce separate SV-9 products for technology and human resources. The specific time
periods selected (and the trends being tracked) are coordinated with architecture transition
plans (which the SV-8 Systems Evolution Description model can support). That is, insertion
of new capabilities and upgrading or re-training of existing resources may depend on or be
driven by the availability of new technology and associated skills. The forecast includes
potential impacts on current architectures and thus influences the development of transition
and target architectures. The forecast is focused on technology and human resource areas
that are related to the purpose for which a given architecture is being described and
identifies issues affecting that architecture.
If standards are an integral part of the technologies important to the evolution of a given
architecture, then it may be convenient to combine SV-9 with the StdV-2 Standards Forecast
in a composite Fit-for-Purpose View.
The SV-9 is constructed as part of a given Architectural Description and in accordance with
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
223
=== page 224 ===
SV-9: Systems Technology and Skills Forecast
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-9.html[3/3/2011 3:46:23 PM]
the Architectural Description purpose. Typically, this involves starting with one or more
overarching reference models or standards profiles to which the architecture must conform.
Using these reference models or standards profiles, the architect selects the service areas
and services relevant to the architecture. The SV-9 DoDAF-described Model forecasts relates
to the Standards Profile (StdV-1) in that a timed forecast may contribute to the decision to
retire or phase out the use of a certain standard in connection with a resource. Similarly,
SV-9 forecasts relate to the Standards Forecasts (StdV-2) in that a certain standard may be
adopted depending on a certain technology or skill becoming available (e.g., the availability
of Java Script may influence the decision to adopt a new HTML standard).
Alternatively, the SV-9 may relate forecasts to SV elements (e.g., systems) where
applicable. The list of resources potentially impacted by the forecasts can also be
summarized as additional information in a SV-9.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
224
=== page 225 ===
SV-10a: Systems Rules Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-10a.html[3/3/2011 3:46:26 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-10a: Systems Rules Model
The SV-10a specifies functional and non-functional constraints on the implementation
aspects of the architecture (i.e., the structural and behavioral elements of the Systems
Viewpoint).
The SV-10a DoDAF-described Model describes constraints on the resources, functions, data,
and ports that make up the SV physical architecture. The constraints are specified in text
and may be functional or structural (i.e., non-functional).
The intended usage of the SV-10a includes:
Definition of implementation logic.
Identification of resource constraints.
Detailed Description:
The Systems Rules Model DoDAF-described Model describes the rules that control, constrain
or otherwise guide the implementation aspects of the architecture. System Rules are
statements that define or constrain some aspect of the business, and may be applied to:
Performers.
Resource Flows.
System Functions.
System Ports.
Data Elements.
In contrast to the OV-6a Operational Rules Model, SV-10a focuses on physical and data
constraints rather than business rules.
Constraints can be categorized as follows:
Structural Assertions - non-functional constraints governing some physical aspect of
the architecture.
Action Assertions - functional constraints governing the behavior of resources, their
interactions and Resource Flow exchanges.
Derivations - these involve algorithms used to compute facts.
Where a System Rule is based on some standard, then that standard should be listed in the
StdV-1 Standards Profile.
Some System Rules can be added as annotations to other models. The SV-10a then should
provide a listing of the complete set of rules with a reference to any models that they affect.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
225
=== page 226 ===
SV-10a: Systems Rules Model
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-10a.html[3/3/2011 3:46:26 PM]
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
226
=== page 227 ===
SV-10b: Systems State Transition Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-10b.html[3/3/2011 3:46:29 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-10b: Systems State Transition Description
The SV-10b is a graphical method of describing a resource (or system function) response to
various events by changing its state. The diagram basically represents the sets of events to
which the resources in the Activities respond (by taking an action to move to a new state)
as a function of its current state. Each transition specifies an event and an action.
The explicit time sequencing of service functions in response to external and internal events
is not fully expressed in SV-4 Systems Functionality Description. The SV-10b can be used to
describe the explicit sequencing of the functions. Alternatively, SV-10b can be used to reflect
explicit sequencing of the actions internal to a single function, or the sequencing of system
functions with respect to a specific resource.
The intended usage of the SV-10b includes:
Definition of states, events and state transitions (behavioral modeling).
Identification of constraints.
Detailed Description:
The SV-10b relates events to resource states and describes the transition from one state to
another. The SV-10b is based on the state chart diagram. A state machine is defined as "a
specification that describes all possible behaviors of some dynamic view element. Behavior is
modeled as a traversal of a graph of specific states interconnected by one or more joined
transition arcs that are triggered by the dispatching of series of event instances. During this
traversal, the state machine executes a series of actions associated with various elements of
the state machine." State chart diagrams can be unambiguously converted to structured
textual rules that specify timing aspects of events and the responses to these events, with
no loss of meaning. However, the graphical form of the state diagrams can often allow quick
analysis of the completeness of the rule set, and detection of dead ends or missing
conditions. These errors, if not detected early during the solution analysis phase, can often
lead to serious behavioral errors in fielded capabilities, or to expensive correction efforts.
The SV-10b models state transitions from a resource perspective, with a focus on how the
resource responds to stimuli (e.g., triggers and events). As in the OV-6b Operational State
Transition Description, these responses may differ depending upon the rule set or conditions
that apply as well as the resource's state at the time the stimuli is received. A change of
state is called a transition. Each transition specifies the response based on a specific event
and the current state. Actions may be associated with a given state or with the transition
between states. A state and its associated actions specify the response of a resource or
function, to events. When an event occurs, the next state may vary depending on the
current state (and its associated action), the event, and the rule set or guard conditions.
The SV-10b can be used to describe the detailed sequencing of functions described in SV-4
Systems Functionality Description. However, the relationship between the actions included in
SV-10b and the functions in SV-4 Systems Functionality Description depends on the
purposes of the architecture and the level of abstraction used in the models. The explicit
sequencing of functions in response to external and internal events is not fully expressed in
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description. SV-10b can be used to reflect explicit sequencing of
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
227
=== page 228 ===
SV-10b: Systems State Transition Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-10b.html[3/3/2011 3:46:29 PM]
the functions, the sequencing of actions internal to a single function, or the sequencing of
functions with respect to a specific resource.
States in a SV-10b model may be nested. This enables quite complex models to be created
to represent systems behavior. Depending upon the architecture project's needs, the SV-10b
may be used separately or in conjunction with the SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
228
=== page 229 ===
SV-10c: Systems Event-Trace Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-10c.html[3/3/2011 3:46:31 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Viewpoints and Models
Systems Viewpoint
SV-10c: Systems Event-Trace Description
The SV-10c provides a time-ordered examination of the interactions between functional
resources. Each event-trace diagram should have an accompanying description that defines
the particular scenario or situation.
The SV-10c is valuable for moving to the next level of detail from the initial solution design,
to help define a sequence of functions and system data interfaces, and to ensure that each
participating resource or System Port role has the necessary information it needs, at the
right time, to perform its assigned functionality.
The intended usage of the SV-10c includes:
Analysis of resource events impacting operation.
Behavioral analysis.
Identification of non-functional system requirements.
Detailed Description:
The SV-10c specifies the sequence in which Resource Flow elements are exchanged in
context of a resource or System Port. Systems Event-Trace Descriptions are sometimes
called sequence diagrams, event scenarios or timing diagrams. The components of a SV-10c
include functional resources or system ports, owning performer as well as the port which is
the subject for the lifeline.
Specific points in time can be identified. The Resource Flow from one resource/port to
another can be labeled with events and their timing. The System Event-Trace Description
provides a time-ordered examination of the Resource Flow elements exchanged between
participating resources (external and internal) or system ports. Each Event/Trace diagram
should have an accompanying description that defines the particular scenario or situation.
The SV-10c is typically used in conjunction with the SV-10b Systems State Transition
Description to describe the dynamic behavior of resources. The data content of messages
that connect Resource Flows in a SV-10c may be related with Resource Flows (the
interactions in the SV-1 Systems Interface Description and SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix),
Resource Flows (the data in the SV-4 Systems Functionality Description and SV-6 Systems
Resource Flow Matrix) and entities (in DIV-3 Physical Data Model) modeled in other models.
SV-1 Systems Interface Description
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow Description
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix
SV-4 Systems Functionality Description
SV-5a Operational Activity to Systems Function Traceability Matrix
SV-5b Operational Activity to Systems Traceability Matrix
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow Matrix
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
All Viewpoint
Capability Viewpoint
Data and Information
Viewpoint
Operational Viewpoint
Project Viewpoint
Services Viewpoint
Standards Viewpoint
Systems Viewpoint
Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
229
=== page 230 ===
SV-10c: Systems Event-Trace Description
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/SV-10c.html[3/3/2011 3:46:31 PM]
SV-8 Systems Evolution Description
SV-9 Systems Technology & Skills Forecast
Introduction to SV-10a, SV10b, and SV-10c
SV-10a Systems Rules Model
SV-10b Systems State Transition Description
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace Description
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
230
=== page 231 ===
Models - Model List
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/models.html[3/3/2011 3:36:47 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Models
Model List
The DoDAF-described Models that are available in DoDAF V2.0 are listed in the table below.
The list provides the possible models and is not prescriptive. The decision-maker and
process owners will determine the DoDAF-described Models that are required for their
purposes. The DoDAF-described Models are grouped into the following viewpoints:
All Viewpoint (AV)
Capability Viewpoint (CV)
Data and Information Viewpoint (DIV)
Operational Viewpoint (OV)
Project Viewpoint (PV)
Services Viewpoint (SvcV)
Standard Viewpoint (StdV)
Systems Viewpoint (SV)
DoDAF V2.0 Models
Models Descriptions
AV-1: Overview and Summary
Information
Describes a Project's Visions, Goals, Objectives, Plans,
Activities, Events, Conditions, Measures, Effects
(Outcomes), and produced objects.
AV-2: Integrated Dictionary An architectural data repository with definitions of all
terms used throughout the architectural data and
presentations.
CV-1: Vision The overall vision for transformational endeavors,
which provides a strategic context for the capabilities
described and a high-level scope.
CV-2: Capability Taxonomy A hierarchy of capabilities which specifies all the
capabilities that are referenced throughout one or
more Architectural Descriptions.
CV-3: Capability Phasing The planned achievement of capability at different
points in time or during specific periods of time. The
CV-3 shows the capability phasing in terms of the
activities, conditions, desired effects, rules complied
with, resource consumption and production, and
measures, without regard to the performer and
location solutions.
CV-4: Capability Dependencies The dependencies between planned capabilities and
the definition of logical groupings of capabilities.
CV-5: Capability to The fulfillment of capability requirements shows the
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Models
Model Categories
Levels of Architecture
Architecture Interrogatives
Architecture Modeling
Primitives
Mapping to DM2
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
231
=== page 232 ===
Models - Model List
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/models.html[3/3/2011 3:36:47 PM]
Organizational Development
Mapping
planned capability deployment and interconnection for
a particular Capability Phase. The CV-5 shows the
planned solution for the phase in terms of performers
and locations and their associated concepts.
CV-6: Capability to Operational
Activities Mapping
A mapping between the capabilities required and the
operational activities that those capabilities support.
CV-7: Capability to Services
Mapping
A mapping between the capabilities and the services
that these capabilities enable.
DIV-1:Conceptual Data Model The required high-level data concepts and their
relationships.
DIV-2: Logical Data Model The documentation of the data requirements and
structural business process (activity) rules. In DoDAF
V1.5, this was the OV-7.
DIV-3: Physical Data Model The physical implementation format of the Logical
Data Model entities, e.g., message formats, file
structures, physical schema. In DoDAF V1.5, this was
the SV-11.
OV-1: High-Level Operational
Concept Graphic
The high-level graphical/textual description of the
operational concept.
OV-2: Operational Resource
Flow Description
A description of the Resource Flows exchanged
between operational activities.
OV-3: Operational Resource
Flow Matrix
A description of the resources exchanged and the
relevant attributes of the exchanges.
OV-4: Organizational
Relationships Chart
The organizational context, role or other relationships
among organizations.
OV-5a: Operational Activity
Decomposition Tree
The capabilities and activities (operational activities)
organized in a hierarchal structure.
OV-5b: Operational Activity
Model
The context of capabilities and activities (operational
activities) and their relationships among activities,
inputs, and outputs; Additional data can show cost,
performers, or other pertinent information.
OV-6a: Operational Rules Model One of three models used to describe activity
(operational activity). It identifies business rules that
constrain operations.
OV-6b: State Transition
Description
One of three models used to describe operational
activity (activity). It identifies business process
(activity) responses to events (usually, very short
activities).
OV-6c: Event-Trace Description One of three models used to describe activity
(operational activity). It traces actions in a scenario or
sequence of events.
PV-1: Project Portfolio It describes the dependency relationships between the
232
=== page 233 ===
Models - Model List
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/models.html[3/3/2011 3:36:47 PM]
Relationships organizations and projects and the organizational
structures needed to manage a portfolio of projects.
PV-2: Project Timelines A timeline perspective on programs or projects, with
the key milestones and interdependencies.
PV-3: Project to Capability
Mapping
A mapping of programs and projects to capabilities to
show how the specific projects and program elements
help to achieve a capability.
SvcV-1 Services Context
Description
The identification of services, service items, and their
interconnections.
SvcV-2 Services Resource Flow
Description
A description of Resource Flows exchanged between
services.
SvcV-3a Systems-Services
Matrix
The relationships among or between systems and
services in a given Architectural Description.
SvcV-3b Services-Services
Matrix
The relationships among services in a given
Architectural Description. It can be designed to show
relationships of interest, (e.g., service-type interfaces,
planned vs. existing interfaces).
SvcV-4 Services Functionality
Description
The functions performed by services and the service
data flows among service functions (activities).
SvcV-5 Operational Activity to
Services Traceability Matrix
A mapping of services (activities) back to operational
activities (activities).
SvcV-6 Services Resource Flow
Matrix
It provides details of service Resource Flow elements
being exchanged between services and the attributes
of that exchange.
SvcV-7 Services Measures
Matrix
The measures (metrics) of Services Model elements for
the appropriate time frame(s).
SvcV-8 Services Evolution
Description
The planned incremental steps toward migrating a
suite of services to a more efficient suite or toward
evolving current services to a future implementation.
SvcV-9 Services Technology &
Skills Forecast
The emerging technologies, software/hardware
products, and skills that are expected to be available
in a given set of time frames and that will affect future
service development.
SvcV-10a Services Rules Model One of three models used to describe service
functionality. It identifies constraints that are imposed
on systems functionality due to some aspect of system
design or implementation.
SvcV-10b Services State
Transition Description
One of three models used to describe service
functionality. It identifies responses of services to
events.
SvcV-10c Services Event-Trace
Description
One of three models used to describe service
functionality. It identifies service-specific refinements
of critical sequences of events described in the
233
=== page 234 ===
Models - Model List
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/models.html[3/3/2011 3:36:47 PM]
Operational Viewpoint.
StdV-1 Standards Profile The listing of standards that apply to solution
elements.
StdV-2 Standards Forecast The description of emerging standards and potential
impact on current solution elements, within a set of
time frames.
SV-1 Systems Interface
Description
The identification of systems, system items, and their
interconnections.
SV-2 Systems Resource Flow
Description
A description of Resource Flows exchanged between
systems.
SV-3 Systems-Systems Matrix The relationships among systems in a given
Architectural Description. It can be designed to show
relationships of interest, (e.g., system-type interfaces,
planned vs. existing interfaces).
SV-4 Systems Functionality
Description
The functions (activities) performed by systems and
the system data flows among system functions
(activities).
SV-5a Operational Activity to
Systems Function Traceability
Matrix
A mapping of system functions (activities) back to
operational activities (activities).
SV-5b Operational Activity to
Systems Traceability Matrix
A mapping of systems back to capabilities or
operational activities (activities).
SV-6 Systems Resource Flow
Matrix
Provides details of system resource flow elements
being exchanged between systems and the attributes
of that exchange.
SV-7 Systems Measures Matrix The measures (metrics) of Systems Model elements
for the appropriate timeframe(s).
SV-8 Systems Evolution
Description
The planned incremental steps toward migrating a
suite of systems to a more efficient suite, or toward
evolving a current system to a future implementation.
SV-9 Systems Technology &
Skills Forecast
The emerging technologies, software/hardware
products, and skills that are expected to be available
in a given set of time frames and that will affect future
system development.
SV-10a Systems Rules Model One of three models used to describe system
functionality. It identifies constraints that are imposed
on systems functionality due to some aspect of system
design or implementation.
SV-10b Systems State
Transition Description
One of three models used to describe system
functionality. It identifies responses of systems to
events.
SV-10c Systems Event-Trace
Description
One of three models used to describe system
functionality. It identifies system-specific refinements
of critical sequences of events described in the
Operational Viewpoint.
234
=== page 235 ===
Models - Model List
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/models.html[3/3/2011 3:36:47 PM]
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
235
=== page 236 ===
Models - Model Categories
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/categories.html[3/3/2011 3:44:17 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Models
Model Categories
To aid the decision-maker and process owners, the DoDAF-described Models have been
categorized into the following types:
Tabular: Models which present data arranged in rows and columns, which includes
structured text as a special case.
Structural: This category comprises diagrams describing the structural aspects of an
architecture.
Behavioral: This category comprises diagrams describing the behavioral aspects of an
architecture.
Mapping: These models provide matrix (or similar) mappings between two different
types of information.
Ontology: Models which extend the DoDAF ontology for a particular architecture.
Pictorial: This category is for free-form pictures.
Timeline: This category comprises diagrams describing the programmatic aspects of
an architecture.
DoDAF Architectural Descriptions are expressed in the form of sets of data, expressed as
DoDAF-described Models, which can be classified into categories. The table below provides a
summary of how the DoDAF-described Models can be sorted using the categories above and
can provide insight for the decision-maker and process owners for the DoDAF-described
Models needed.
 
DoDAF-Described Models Categorized by Type
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Models
Model Categories
Levels of Architecture
Architecture Interrogatives
Architecture Modeling
Primitives
Mapping to DM2
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
236
=== page 237 ===
Models - Model Categories
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/categories.html[3/3/2011 3:44:17 PM]
 
Some of the DoDAF-described Models above were based on analysis of Ministry of Defence
Architecture Framework (MODAF) and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Architecture Framework (NAF) views and information requirements provided in the key
process workshops by the subject matter experts. In addition, analysis on the DoDAF V1.5
products was performed by the DoDAF V2.0 Presentation Technical Working Group . The
objective of the analysis was to determine if any product could be eliminated or if any
product was created in every architecture effort. The OV-1 is the most created product at 92
percent of the projects. The SV-7 was the least created product at 5 percent. What is
revealing is that there was not a product that could be deleted. The results of the survey are
documented in the DoDAF Product Development Questionnaire Analysis Report online in the
DoDAF Journal.
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
237
=== page 238 ===
Models - Levels of Architecture
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/levels.html[3/3/2011 3:44:20 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Models
Levels of Architecture
In addition, based on the level of the architecture effort, the decision-maker and architect
need to determine the DoDAF-described Models and Fit-for-Purpose Views needed. To assist,
the table below uses the Zachman Framework with the levels of architecture overlaid for
consideration by the decision-maker and architect. The table is only provided as input;
DoDAF is not prescribing DoDAF-described Model or Fit-for-Purpose Views or presentations.
 
Zachman Framework with Levels of Architecture
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Models
Model Categories
Levels of Architecture
Architecture Interrogatives
Architecture Modeling
Primitives
Mapping to DM2
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
238
=== page 239 ===
Models - Architecture Interrogatives
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/interrogatives.html[3/3/2011 3:44:24 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Models
Architecture Interrogatives
A critical part of defining an architecture is answering what is known as, the set of standard
interrogatives, which are the set of questions, who, what, when, where, why, and how, that
facilitate collection and usage of architecture-related data. DoDAF provides a means of
answering these interrogatives through the DoDAF Viewpoints and DoDAF-described Models,
and the DoDAF Meta-model Data Groups, as the major parts of the DoDAF Conceptual Data
Model (CDM).
The table below is a simple matrix that presents the DoDAF Viewpoints and DoDAF-
described Models as they relate to the DoDAF Meta-model Groups, and how these
viewpoints, models, and groups answer the standard interrogatives. When architecture is
required to support decision-making, the matrix is useful in both data collection, and
decisions on how to best represent the data in DoDAF-described Models that are appropriate
to the purpose for which the architecture is created.
Standard Interrogatives Matrix
 
As an
 example, a decision is required on changing a logistics transaction process (a
composite of activities). The process is documented (how), to include the measures of
performance, services required, and the capability supported by the action (activity). Data
required to execute the process (what) is collected concurrently. Included in that data
collection is the location and other administrative data on the place of process execution
(where), and the performers of the action (who). The time frames required (when) and the
Rules, Goals, and Expected Results (why) are also determined. These interrogatives impact
on measures of performance. Each of these interrogatives can be represented by either a
DoDAF-described Model or a Fit-for-Purpose View defined by the architectural development
team that meets agency requirements. Either way, the models and views needed are created
utilizing data defined and derived from the DoDAF Meta-model.
The architecture interrogatives are overlaid on the DM2 Conceptual Data Model below:
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Models
Model Categories
Levels of Architecture
Architecture Interrogatives
Architecture Modeling
Primitives
Mapping to DM2
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
239
=== page 240 ===
Models - Architecture Interrogatives
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/interrogatives.html[3/3/2011 3:44:24 PM]
The Data Description - What (DM2 generalizes to other Resources besides just Data)
The Function Description - How (and also the Performer that performs the Function,
Measures, Rules, and Conditions associated with)
The Network Description - Where (generalized)
The People Description - Who (DM2 includes Organizations)
The Time Description - When
The Motivation Description - Why (broadened to include Capability requirements)
Architecture Interrogative overlay on the DM2 Conceptual Data Model
(click to enlarge)
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
240
=== page 241 ===
Models - Architecture Modeling Primitives
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/primitives.html[3/3/2011 3:44:27 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Models
Architecture Modeling Primitives
Work is presently underway within the Department to ensure uniform representation for the
same semantic content within architecture viewing, called Architecture Modeling Primitives.
The Architecture Modeling Primitives, hereafter referred to as Primitives, will be a standard
set of viewing elements and associated symbols mapped to DM2 concepts and applied to
viewing techniques. Use of the Primitives to support the collection of architecture content in
concert with the Physical Exchange Specification will aid in generating common
understanding and improving communication. As the Primitives concepts are applied to more
viewing techniques, they will be updated in the DoDAF Journal and details provided in
subsequent releases of DoDAF. When creating an OV-6c in Business Process Modeling
Notation (BPMN), the primitives notation may be used. DoD has created the notation and it
is in the DoDAF Journal. The full range of Primitives for DoDAF-described Models, as with the
current BPMN Primitives, will be coordinated for adoption by architecture tool vendors.
Examples of presentations can be viewed online in the public DoDAF Journal.
 
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Models
Model Categories
Levels of Architecture
Architecture Interrogatives
Architecture Modeling
Primitives
Mapping to DM2
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
241
=== page 242 ===
Models - Mapping to DM2
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/mapping.html[3/3/2011 3:36:52 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Models
Mapping to DM2
A mapping of the DM2 Concepts (classes), Associations (relationships), and Attributes to
DoDAF-described Models, is shown in the table below. In the DM2 Concept, Association, or
Attribute column, the Black text is a concept or attribute, the Red text is an association, and
the Green Text is the security attributes in the DM2.
 
Click on 
the image below to open or save the Excel worksheet.
DM2 Mapping
 
Go to top of page ↑
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Models
Model Categories
Levels of Architecture
Architecture Interrogatives
Architecture Modeling
Primitives
Mapping to DM2
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
242
=== page 243 ===
Architecture Presentation Techniques
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/presentation.html[3/3/2011 3:34:10 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Architecture Development
Architecture Presentation Techniques
While information is the lifeblood of enterprise architecture, it can be overwhelming to
decision makers when presented in a raw format. Likewise, the structured methodology of
modeling enterprise architecture information is both necessary and useful for creating
Architectural Descriptions that can be shared between organizations. However, many of the
'traditional' architecture products are unwieldy because of their format and are useful only to
trained architects. Many organizations develop a mandated architecture but make it
expensive shelf-ware instead of using it to communicate important, accurate, and relevant
information to the stakeholders who need it. Architects must be able to communicate
architectural information in a meaningful way to process owners and other stakeholders, or
the discipline of enterprise architecture will soon meet an untimely demise.
The results of architectural-related data collection need to be presentable to non-technical
senior executives and managers at all levels. Many managers are skilled decision-makers,
but have not had technical training in Architectural Description development. Since
Architectural Description development efforts are designed to provide input to the decision-
making process, representation of data needed is a logical extension of the overall process.
This section describes these representations (architects call them models or views).
Overview
Effective presentation of business information is necessary for architects to tell the story of
the architectural data with stakeholders. Since the purpose of the architecture discipline is to
collect and store all relevant information about an enterprise, or some specific part of the
enterprise, it can reasonably be assumed that the majority of information needed by an
organization's decision makers is contained somewhere in the architectural data. Many of the
existing architecture methods are valuable for organizing architectural information, but less
valuable for communicating that information to stakeholders. Presentation views are always
dependent on the quality of the architectural information that is collected through the rigor
of architecture methods. As the figure below illustrates, presentation techniques pull from
the architectural information store and display the data in a variety of meaningful ways to
stakeholders.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Composite Views
Fusion Views
Reference Models
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
243
=== page 244 ===
Architecture Presentation Techniques
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/presentation.html[3/3/2011 3:34:10 PM]
Presentation Techniques
The presentation techniques and best practices described here were developed based on the
idea that business information, captured both internally and externally to an organization's
architecture in support of common user requirements, can be displayed in a way that
enhances clarity and understanding, and facilitates decision-making. That often means
complex technical information has to be 'translated' into a form for presentation that is
useful to management. An 'Information Bridge', as shown in the figure below, is the link
between the architect and management. The bridge provides the means to take technical
information, and recast that information in graphical or textual terms that consistent with the
culture of the organization.
The Information Bridge
DoDAF V1.0 and V1.5 defined a set of products for visualizing, understanding, and
assimilating the broad scope and complexities of an Architectural Description through
graphic, tabular, or textual means. These products can still be produced, and are supported
by the sets of DoDAF-described Models.
Choosing an Appropriate Presentation Technique
In any given business process, decisions must be made at multiple levels of the organization.
244
=== page 245 ===
Architecture Presentation Techniques
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/presentation.html[3/3/2011 3:34:10 PM]
Whether one is a senior level executive, a process owner, or a system developer, he or she
will need to make judgment calls based upon the available data. Each level of decision
making, in turn, has both a unique purpose and understanding of Architectural Description,
making it important to tailor the data to maximize its effectiveness. The presenter, with the
help of an experienced architect, must determine the audience of a presentation before
choosing the type of presentation technique to use. The figure below, based on the Zachman
Framework, summarizes the multiple levels of decision makers within a typical organization
that make up an audience.
 
Levels of Decision-Makers
Each level has differing requirements for presentation of data. Level 1 Planners may find a
graphical wall chart more useful in making decisions, whereas a Level 4 Builder will most
likely require a more technical presentation, one relating more directly to the Architectural
Description. Level 5 sub-contractors are the workers who will perform the work required,
and generally required varying levels of technical data and other information to accomplish
their task.
Narrowing down the type of presentation required is done by asking the following question:
What information does the decision maker need to make a data-supported decision? For
each decision level there is a data set that can be manipulated using a presentation
technique. After analyzing the audience and type of information, the presenter should
consider the various types of techniques discussed in this section. The "Level of Decision-
Makers" figure is a simplified representation of the presentation development process.
 
245
=== page 246 ===
Architecture Presentation Techniques
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/presentation.html[3/3/2011 3:34:10 PM]
Presentation Development Process
It is imperative to realize that when choosing how to present data sets, there is no limit on
what views to use. There are countless ways to display information to decision makers, and
it is up to the presentation developer to determine the most effective way to accomplish this
task.
This section describes a base of view development techniques to start from, each created to
serve its own unique purpose. Details are provided on five different presentation techniques
that have proven to be useful in engaging various audiences.
A more detailed discussion of DM2 Meta-model Groups is provided in the LDM, including a
description and purpose for each group, the data capture method, and the use of each
group. There are the DoDAF-described Models  that derive from and conform to the DM2.
Alternatively, Fit-for-Purpose Views can be created, utilizing DoDAF-conformant data that
provide other forms of graphical presentation. These use presentation that are more common
to briefings and decision analysis. The five techniques commonly used are:
Composite Views: Display multiple pieces of architectural data in formats that are
relevant to a specific decision maker.
Dashboards: Integrate abstracted architectural information for a given business
context.
Fusion Views: Display multiple pieces of architectural data and incorporate disparate
pieces of information that are not captured within the Architectural Description.
Graphics: Visually represent manipulated data.
Reference Models: Capture the elements of the architectural data and translate those
elements into text.
Fit-for-Purpose Views provide wide flexibility for the architect and process owner to create
architectural views easily understood and useful to management for decision-making
purposes. Each of these types of views is described below.
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
246
=== page 247 ===
Architecture Development Composite Views
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/composite.html[3/3/2011 3:37:40 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Architecture Development
Composite Views
A composite view displays multiple pieces of architectural data in formats that are relevant
to a specific decision maker. By drawing information from numerous sources, this
presentation technique provides a holistic view for the audience. Contrasting two or more
snapshots next to each other allow for an easy comparison of composite views. These views
will be comprised of related architectural views that directly support each other (i.e., system
functions in an SV-4 that support activities in an OV-5). The view can be graphically
displayed in three dimensions to tie the pieces of architectural data together.
Purpose and Audience
Composite views allow decision makers to view important relationships in data without
reading through large pieces of architectural data. Most business owners are interested only
in their particular business area and its immediate interconnections. By placing relevant parts
of architectural data directly in front of the audience, it is easier to gain a comprehensive
understanding of the data in an efficient manner. The audience that will find these views
most useful are:
Process Owners who have direct staff oversight or technical systems expertise and
require high level conceptual briefings.
Designers-implementers of the initiative, who require information detailing specifics of
implementation.
Builders-System architects who require details on how to implement and use
products.
Examples
The example composite view figure illustrates a simplified example of a Composite View. The
activity "Determine Accession Type" is supported by the system function "Maintain Candidate
Data" via User Interface. The information to support this system function includes "Accession
Type Information" and "Other Candidate Information". The activity is carried out by a
"Human Resource Specialist".
Example Composite View
The figure below illustrates a final version of a different Composite View. Four architectural
samples are displayed, and a three-dimensional Capability label lets the audience know the
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Composite Views
Fusion Views
Reference Models
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
247
=== page 248 ===
Architecture Development Composite Views
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/composite.html[3/3/2011 3:37:40 PM]
common tie.
Another Composite View
 
Composite views
 are ideal for explaining interconnections between Architectural Descriptions.
The audience will more easily understand relationships in data by viewing manageable slices
of mappings all at once. The developer of these views can interchange Architectural
Descriptions easily, highlighting the most important parts for the audience. Composite views
are neither wordy, nor oversimplified. Additionally, they can be used by a wide range
audience.
Dashboard Views
Dashboards integrate abstracted architectural information for a given business context and
are generally geared to displaying information required by a specific stakeholder. A well-
constructed dashboard consists of a status, trend, or a variance to a plan, forecast, or
budget (or combination thereof). Dashboards are generally user friendly, providing easy
access to enterprise data to enable organizations to track performance and optimize
decision-making. High-level decision makers generally like dashboards because dashboards
are frequently used in other business contexts besides enterprise architecture, and decision
makers have a familiarity with this presentation tool. In addition, the dashboard is formatted
so key stakeholders can review valuable, insightful information at a glance to manage their
organization's performance goals effectively.
Purpose and Audience
The visual qualities of a dashboard allow executives and managers to identify which of their
business areas are successful and which are problem areas needing immediate attention.
Like all enterprise architecture presentation techniques, the dashboard must be designed
with the stakeholder audience in mind and should be geared towards the audience's specific
goals. One of the most important goals in creating a dashboard is to deliver a highly intuitive
tool that yields greater business insight for decision makers.
Since dashboards display highly aggregated and abstracted information, they are typically
targeted to senior decision makers. However, they are also a great tool to share with junior
architects to ensure they understand key business drivers and concepts as they take a
deeper dive into their respective areas.
Examples
248
=== page 249 ===
Architecture Development Composite Views
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/composite.html[3/3/2011 3:37:40 PM]
The visualization techniques table illustrates various visualization techniques that can be
used to create a dashboard.
Visualization Techniques
Visualization
Technique Description When to Use
Pie Chart Pie charts can be used for
representing small sets of
information. However, they are
generally considered poor data
visualization for any data set with
more than half a dozen elements.
The problem with pie charts is that
it is very difficult to discern
proportional differences with a
radically divided circle, except in
the case of a small data set that
has large value differences within
it. Pie charts also pose a problem
for labeling, as they are either
dependent on a color or pattern to
describe the different data
elements, or the labels need to be
arranged around the perimeter of
the pie, creating a visual
distraction.
Pie charts should be used to
represent very small data sets that
are geared to high-level
relationships between data
elements. Pie charts present
summary level relationships, and
should be used carefully for
detailed analysis.
Bar Chart Bar charts are an ideal
visualization for showing the
relationship of data elements
within a series or multiple series.
Bar charts allow for easy
comparison of values, share a
common measure, and are easily
compared to one another.
Bar charts are best suited for
categorical analysis but can also be
used for short duration series
analysis (e.g., the months of a
year). A presenter needs to be
aware of the risks in using bar
charts if there is a data set that
has one element with a large
outlier value; this will render the
visualization for the remaining data
elements unusable. This chart scale
is linear, and will not clearly
represent the relationships
between the remaining data
elements.
Line Charts Time series line charts are most
commonly used with the time
dimension along the X-axis and
the data being measured along the
Y-axis.
Use line charts when you would
like to see trends over time in a
measure, versus a side-by-side,
detailed comparison of data points.
Line charts are ideal for time series
analysis where you want to see the
progress of one or more measures
over time. Line charts also allow
for comparative trend analysis as
you can stack multiple series of
data into one chart.
Area Charts Area charts can be considered a
subset of the line chart, where the
area under or above the line is
Area charts are good for simple
comparisons with multiple series of
data. By setting contrasting color
249
=== page 250 ===
Architecture Development Composite Views
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/composite.html[3/3/2011 3:37:40 PM]
shaded or colored. hues you can easily compare the
trends over time between two or
more series.
Tables and Lists Tables and lists contain large
amounts of data that can be
categorized into a list or divided
into a table but cannot be easily
compiled into a visual or numerical
analysis tool.
Tables and lists are best used for
information that either contains
large lists of non-numeric data, or
data that has relationships not
easily visualized or does not lend
itself to easy numeric analysis.
 
An illustration
 of the use of these techniques to create a dashboard.
Notional Dashboard
A dashboard is effective in demonstrating the number of systems supporting an activity or
modifying a data element. It can provide data from a variety of sources to create a multi-
disciplined and multi-dimensional performance feedback. It combines standard components
and building blocks to create an executive dashboard that meets particular needs.
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
250
=== page 251 ===
Architecture Development Fusion Views
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/fusion.html[3/3/2011 3:37:44 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Architecture Development
Fusion Views
A fusion view is very similar to a composite view in that it displays multiple pieces of
architectural data in formats that are relevant to a specific decision maker. However, a
fusion view also incorporates disparate pieces of information that are not captured within the
Architectural Description. Fusion views are frequently used to display information that is
sensitive in nature and that is viewed only by certain stakeholders making specific decisions.
For example, fusion views could be used to display funding information regarding a program
or system.
Purpose and Audience
Fusion views serve as a single location for viewing disparate pieces of information from
within and outside of the context of the Architectural Description. A fusion view can be used
to bridge the gap between an enterprise architecture analysis, other analysis, and
transformation processes. It is frequently used when making a decision that incorporates
information that has been deliberately omitted from the Architectural Description.
Fusion views can be used by all members of the Development Team (i.e., Planners, Owners,
Designers, Builders, and Subcontractors). Planners use them to review portfolio choices
within the context of the Architectural Description and to determine how choices compare to
the portfolio as a whole, as well as against an individual system or group of systems. Owners
use fusion views to review current progress against planned goals, which may include cost
and schedule data or to address capability gaps within the Architectural Description.
Designers, Builders, and Subcontractors can use a more detailed fusion view to review
implementation impacts associated with the development of a particular system and to show
the complexity of the information involved.
Examples
The financial data fusion view figure incorporates financial data and support information into
an analysis. The outside information commonly consists of financial data gathered from
authorized sources or scheduling information and constraints gathered from a Work
Breakdown Structure (WBS) or similar reporting mechanism. This can be tailored so that the
user can use any data that is relevant to their needs.
Click image for larger view
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Composite Views
Fusion Views
Reference Models
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
251
=== page 252 ===
Architecture Development Fusion Views
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/fusion.html[3/3/2011 3:37:44 PM]
Financial Data Fusion View
A fusion view is a powerful tool with the ability to portray accurately the relationships
between different types of information. A fusion view can be used to provide a 360-degree
view of a system, validate systems against Architectural Descriptions, show availability of
services, or provide a perspective of a current environment (e.g., a viewpoint) that can be
used in decision-making discussions.
Graphics Views
A graphic is a representation (as a picture, map, or graph) used especially for illustration of
concepts. In the case of enterprise architecture, graphics views are used for the pictorial
representation and manipulation of data. In other words graphics provide a visual
representation of business information and processes. Graphical views can be of tremendous
benefit in representing multiple concepts in a clean, simple design.
Purpose and Audience
Graphical views provide a visual depiction of the information and are therefore targeted at
visually oriented learners. When properly executed, a graphical view allows the intended
audience to view the information in an uncluttered, easy to understand, and precise design.
Additionally, graphical views can attract attention and cause interest. Most people
understand pictures faster and easier than they do text or model-based documents.
Graphical views provide the presenter with unlimited options for displaying their business
concepts and for tailoring their product to the targeted audience.
Because of the lack of underlying complexity, a graphical view tends to be more abstract and
is usually presented to high-level audiences. The identification of the target stakeholder level
and the intended message is the first step in determining whether a graphical view is the
appropriate tool for information delivery. The appropriateness of graphical views can only be
determined once the message and stakeholder level have been identified. Graphical
depictions of data and business processes can be tailored to any stakeholder level as long as
252
=== page 253 ===
Architecture Development Fusion Views
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/fusion.html[3/3/2011 3:37:44 PM]
the intended message and information can be represented in a logical, reader-friendly form.
All levels of decision makers will find graphical views useful for high-level analysis.
Examples
The use of graphical views is a common practice in DoD and non-DoD organizations. Because
graphical views do not usually show the underlying complexity, it is important to remember
that they are tied to details within the Architectural Description. As with dashboard views, if
a stakeholder does not understand where the information came from, or if they lack faith in
the detailed architectural information, then the graphical view will essentially be meaningless
to them. It is also critical to emphasize the underlying architectural information when
briefing the graphic to senior decision makers. An OV-1, for example, provides a high-level
concept description of a business, and is usually the first, and can be the only architectural
view a senior decision maker sees. In order for an OV-1 to have an impact, a decision maker
must be able to see a direct correlation from the graphic view to the detailed aspects of the
business.
The following figures illustrate this concept. Each part of the graphic view corresponds to a
detailed area of the overall business, which will be represented and composed of a complex
set of architectural views. The graphical views are also used to show the relationships
between the business areas which come together to form a complete picture.
Non-prescriptive, Illustrative High-level Concept Description (OV-1)
 
253
=== page 254 ===
Architecture Development Fusion Views
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/fusion.html[3/3/2011 3:37:44 PM]
Non-prescriptive, Illustrative High-level Operational Connectivity
Description (OV-2)
Graphical views enable the efficient communication of complex quantitative ideas. In a
society that is fascinated with visual stimulation, the use of graphical views provides an
attractive and efficient communications tool. When effectively designed, graphical views can
facilitate understanding and recognition; promote analysis; and support learning and sharing
of ideas.
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
254
=== page 255 ===
Architecture Development Reference Models
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/reference.html[3/3/2011 3:37:48 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Architecture Development
Reference Models
Reference models provide textual extractions of underlying architectural data. As the notional
reference model figure below illustrates, reference models capture the elements of the
architectural views, and translate those elements into text. This reference model provides a
framework for describing important elements of the FEA in a common and consistent way.
The FEA consists of five reference models: Performance Reference Model (PRM), Business
Reference Model (BRM), Service Component Reference Model (SRM), Data Reference Model
(DRM), and the Technical Reference Model (TRM). Through the use of this common
framework and vocabulary, IT portfolios can be better managed and leveraged across the
Federal Government.
A Notional Reference Model
Purpose and Audience
Reference models are designed to facilitate cross-agency analysis, through the development
of a common taxonomy and ontology for describing the business operations of Federal
agencies, independent of any specific agency. Cross-agency analysis is used by planners and
process owners to identify duplicate investments, gaps, and opportunities for collaboration
within and across agencies. Collectively, the reference models comprise a framework for
describing important elements of the FEA in a common and consistent way. Through the use
of this common framework and vocabulary, IT portfolios can be better managed and
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Composite Views
Fusion Views
Reference Models
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
255
=== page 256 ===
Architecture Development Reference Models
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/reference.html[3/3/2011 3:37:48 PM]
leveraged across the Federal Government.
Examples
One example of a reference model is the FEA BRM. The BRM provides an organized,
hierarchical construct for describing the day-to-day business operations of the Federal
Government. While many models exist for describing organizations, (organization charts,
location maps, etc.) this model presents the business using a functionally driven approach.
The Lines of Business and Sub-functions that comprise the BRM represent a departure from
previous models of the Federal Government that use antiquated, stove-piped, agency-
oriented frameworks. The BRM is the first layer of the Federal Enterprise Architecture, and it
is the main viewpoint for the analysis of data, service components, and technology:
 
BRM Structure
The BRM is broken into four areas: Services for Citizens, Mode of Delivery, Support Delivery
of Services, and Management of Government Resources. The model's four Business Areas
are decomposed into 39 Lines of Business. Each business line includes a collection of Sub-
functions that represent the lowest level of granularity in the BRM. For example, the
Environmental Management Line of Business encompasses three Sub-functions: (1)
Environmental Monitoring and Forecasting; (2) Environmental Remediation; and (3) Pollution
Prevention and Control. Within each Sub-function are the agency-specific business functions,
processes, and activities:
BRM Areas
 
256
=== page 257 ===
Architecture Development Reference Models
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/reference.html[3/3/2011 3:37:48 PM]
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
257
=== page 258 ===
CM Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CM_overview.html[3/3/2011 3:34:15 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
CM Overview
Configuration Management of the DoDAF Architecture Framework
CM provides an orderly way to facilitate change, based on a documented requirements
baseline, and utilizing best practices in the change management process. This is intended to
ensure that expectations are fully understood and realized in an efficient manner, including
proper consideration of all potential impacts on customers and resources. CM is a necessary
and critical process to assure an orderly and stable evolution of any Architectural Description
and also to ensure that the DoDAF remains current in the face of evolving methods and
techniques of Architectural Description creation and management.
This section provides a summary overview of the two primary a `spects of CM of DoD
enterprise architecture efforts:
CM guidance to developers of specific instance Architectural Descriptions prepared
within DoD in accordance with the DoDAF.
CM of the DoD Framework document content itself.
These CM activities are complementary with existing DoD CM processes for the DARS, the
DoD Information Technology Standards Registry (DISR), and the Metadata Registry (MDR).
A more comprehensive description of the overall CM Process is found online in the DoDAF
Journal.
Configuration Management Authority
The CM Authority for the contents of the DoDAF document is the DoD CIO, Office of the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (OASD) Enterprise Architecture & Standards Directorate.
Configuration Management Guidance for Program Managers
There are many benefits to the Department gained by adhering to a CM Program in the
production of architectural data, thus providing consistency to the creation and utilization of
presentation views, while still allowing flexibility in graphical presentation. These include:
Utilization of the DM2 (Conceptual, Logical and PES) in architectural data collection,
organization, storage, and documentation.
Utilization of DoDAF technical guidance (Contained in Volume 2, and the
DoDAF Journal) in the creation and graphical representation of views, based on
architectural data and a desired viewpoint. This is accomplished by:
DoDAF definition of attributes for common architectural views. Thus, there is a
known basis for making change to architectural views, and a means for
evaluating the effectiveness of that change according to the chosen viewpoint.
DoDAF representation of a common vocabulary and grammar for documenting
Architectural Descriptions thus facilitating common understanding among DoD
components, ensuring interoperability in exchanging architectural data and
federation of individual Architectural Descriptions within a higher tier enterprise
view.
Traceability of Requirements . Architectural data can more easily be associated
with baseline requirements, and, as requirements change, the associated impacts on
present and future actions can more easily be evaluated, and more accurately reflect
the change requirement.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
258
=== page 259 ===
CM Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CM_overview.html[3/3/2011 3:34:15 PM]
Configuration Identification. Utilization of DoDAF data elements allows a consistent
identification of Configuration Items (CIs), which are currently defined as:
The Vocabulary – The Elements (e.g., process, system function, Capability)
and Views (AV, OV, SV, StdV, etc.) that describe the behavioral, tabular,
mapping, ontological, and structural representations of an Architectural
Description. The metadata (e.g., Information about data in the Architectural
Description).
The Grammar– The formal conceptual and logical relationships between
elements and products of the Vocabulary – The Conceptual and LDM.
The Presentation Guidelines – “Fit-for-Purpose” viewpoints, dashboards,
decision views, etc.
Methods and Process Guidelines.
The DoDAF Document – The narrative volumes comprising the DoDAF.
Organized Process. Change activity is controlled through a known, documented, and
organized process.
Improved Change Management. Architectural data can be better managed to
produce stable and consistent requirements to guide the development of interoperable
systems, processes, and procedures.
Improved Analysis and Trades. Analyses that better reflect customer need through
common understanding and explicit documentation of architecture baselines and
change evolution.
Configuration Management Implementation
Each Architectural Description effort must establish a CM process and document it in a CM
Plan. This plan is submitted when each version or update to the Architectural Description is
submitted to DARS for registration and discovery. In developing CM processes for
Architectural Descriptions it is recommended that best practices be adopted such as those
outlined in Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA) Standard EA-649. This a flexible, but well-
defined standard employed most often at the enterprise level. Its flexibility lies in the ability
to provide CM practices that can be selectively applied to the degree necessary for each of
the areas to be covered under this plan.
Evaluating Architecture Changes
Appropriate evaluation criteria should be developed in the CM Plan and applied according to
the scope and tier of the Architectural Description effort. The evaluation criteria must include
factors that test compliance with the Net-Centric Reference Architectures and the DoD IE as
outlined in Section 3.0 of the DoDAF and the Net-Centric Guidance contained in Volume 2.
The results of architecture evaluations should be used to guide decisions for approving
proposed changes, as well as in planning future extensions or updates to the Architectural
Description.
The DARS Registration Process
Consistent with the federated architecture approach described in Section 3, essential
architectural information must be registered with DARS so that discovery of reusable
architectural data can be accomplished throughout the Department. Generally, and as
further described in the instructions on registration contained online in the DARS, this
consists of the Overview and Summary Information (AV-1) which can be completed online,
and the Configuration Control Plan (CCP) that describes how the organization intends to
manage and periodically update its information. Individual data entities and other artifacts
are similarly registered in the DMR.
Configuration Control Board
The DoDAF Configuration Control Board (CCB) provides an organized management review
process to ensure validity, currency, and timeliness of architectural data described over time.
The board provides CM and control carefully scoped and administered to reduce the burden
259
=== page 260 ===
CM Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CM_overview.html[3/3/2011 3:34:15 PM]
and complexity of architecture sharing and maintenance, as well as update, while providing
flexibility to the DoD community in the continued management of their architectural views
and associated data. The CCB consists of members appointed by the Deputy DoD CIO, and
includes representatives of the Joint Staff, the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the
Military Services, Combatant Commands, and Defense Agencies.
Technical Working Groups
The CCB may, from time to time, establish technical working groups (TWG), as required, to
oversee, review, and make recommendations to the board on specific technical aspects of
the CM Program, or configuration items. TWGs provide the subject-matter expertise
necessary to ensure that documents, the DM2, and other products under configuration
control of the CCB are maintained in a responsible manner. TWGs, when tasked by the CCB,
provide detailed and comprehensive technical review of proposed changes and
recommendations to the CCB on action(s) to be taken that result from recommended
changes.
In addition, there is a standing TWG for the DM2. DM2 change requests (action items) can
be raised by any of the working group members or flow down from the CCB. A working copy
of the DM2 is maintained, along with all reference and research materials and the current
action item tracker. DM2 issues impacting the foundation are forwarded to the International
Defense Enterprise Architecture Specification (IDEAS) Group for consideration. When a
number of changes have accumulated, the TWG recommends a new DM2 baseline version be
established and released. Upon, approval by the CCB, the new DM2 is published along with a
record of changes from last baseline and a new working copy is setup.
Both permanent members of the CCB and members of all technical working groups are
notified about all CCB meetings and all scheduled TWG sessions, as are the Combatant
Commands and Defense Agencies.
 
260
=== page 261 ===
CM Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CM_overview.html[3/3/2011 3:34:15 PM]
Topic Areas in the DM2 Collaboration Site
 
DM2 Working Group (WG)
The Configuration Management Authority for the DM2 is the DoD CIO. The management
structure of the CM Program is in two parts: The Architecture and Standards Review Group
(ASRG) and the DM2 Working Groups (WG).
The DM2 WG is the configuration management working body for the DM2. The DM2 WG was
established during DoDAF 2.0 development and was transitioned to be the DM2 CM body.
The DM2 WG oversees, reviews, and makes recommendations to the ASRG on specific
technical aspects of the CM Program, or Configuration Items (CI). The DM2 WG provides the
subject-matter expertise necessary to ensure that DM2 CI’s under configuration control of
the ASRG are maintained in a responsible manner. The DM2 WG when tasked by the ASRG,
provides detailed and comprehensive technical review of proposed changes and
recommendations to the ASRG on action(s) to be taken that result from recommended
changes. The DM2 WG also acts as the DoD Enterprise Architecture COI Data Management
Working Group (DMWG).
The DM2 WG interacts with the following organizations as shown in the figure below. Roles of
these organizations with respect to DM2 CM are as follows:
261
=== page 262 ===
CM Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CM_overview.html[3/3/2011 3:34:15 PM]
1. Architecture and Standards Review Group (ASRG). The ASRG serves within the DoD
CIO Enterprise Governance framework. The ASRG
 is subordinate to the DOD CIO
Enterprise Guidance Board. It is chartered to: review architecture policy and guidance;
identify DoD Information technology (IT) technical standards; oversee IT standards
management; review architectures and enforce architecture policy; oversee DoD EA
Federation; and enforce DoD Information Enterprise Architecture (IEA) compliance.
The ASRG works through a dedicated secretariat, standing groups, and ad hoc
working groups (Tiger Teams) to execute its responsibilities. Standing groups include
the Information Technology Standards Committee (ITSC), Global Information Grid
Technical Guidance Configuration Management Board (GTG CMB), the Architecture
Review Group (ARG) and the Enterprise Reference Architecture Cell (ERAC). Ad hoc
groups will be constituted as needed to work specific issues related to policy,
compliance criteria, reference models, and related issues in the EA and standards
domains.  Support 
will be provided by member organizations, and existing groups will
re-align under the ASRG as applicable.
The ASRG provides the overall direction and management of DM2 CM and exercises
approval authority over all changes proposed in any part of the DM2 CI’s.
2. IDEAS Group.  TBS
3. Industry 
Advisory and Standards Groups to include OMG and OASIS.   TBS
4. Related 
COI’s to include UCORE and C2 Core.  TBS
5. Controlled 
Vocabulary groups.  TBS
6. Pilots 
and Early Adopters.  TBS
7. DoDAF 
WG.  TBS
8. DARS 
TWG.  TBS
9. DoD 
MDR WG.  TBS
10. EA 
Tool Vendors.  TBS
 
Go to top of page ↑
262
=== page 263 ===
CM Overview
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/CM_overview.html[3/3/2011 3:34:15 PM]
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
263
=== page 264 ===
Glossary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/glossary.html[3/3/2011 3:34:20 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Acronyms List and Glossary of Terms
 
Acronyms
Acronym Definition
ADM Architecture Development
 Method
AMETL Agency Mission Essential Task List
ASD Assistant Secretary of Defense
AT&L Acquisition Technology and Logistics
AV All Viewpoint
BEA Business Enterprise Architecture
BMM Business Motivation Model
BPMN Business Process Modeling Notation
BPR Business Process Reengineering
BRM Business Reference Model
BT Business Transformation
BTA Business Transformation Agency
C4I Command, Control, Communications, Computers and Intelligence
C4ISRAF Command, Control, Communications, Computers, and Intelligence
Surveillance Reconnaissance Architecture Framework
CADM Core Architecture Data Model
CCB Configuration Control Board
CCP Configuration Control Plan
CDD Capability Development Document
CDM Conceptual Data Model
CIO Chief Information Officer
CJCSI Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Instruction
CJCSM Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual
CM Configuration Management
COI Community Of Interest
COMSEC Communications Security
CONOPS Concepts of Operations
CPD Capability Production Document
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
 
Department of Defense
264
=== page 265 ===
Glossary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/glossary.html[3/3/2011 3:34:20 PM]
CPIC Capital Planning and Investment Control
CPM Capability Portfolio Management
CRM Consolidated Reference Model
CV Capability Viewpoint
CWID Coalition Warrior Interoperability Demonstration
DAES DoD Architecture Enterprise Services
DARS DoD Architecture Registry System
DAS Defense Acquisition System
DDMS DoD Discovery Metadata Specification
DIEA DoD Information Enterprise Architecture
DISR DoD Information Technology Standards and Profile Registry
DITPR DoD Information Technology Portfolio Repository
DIV Data and Information Viewpoint
DM2 DoDAF Meta-model
DMR DoD Metadata Registry
DoDAF DoD Architecture Framework
DoDI Department of Defense Instruction
DOTMLPF Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, Leadership and Education,
Personnel,
and Facilities
DPG Defense Planning Guidance
DRM Data Reference Model
EA Enterprise Architecture
EAAF Enterprise Architecture Assessment Framework
EAMMF Enterprise Architecture Management Maturity Framework
EIA Electronic Industries Alliance
E-ISP Enhanced-Information Support Plan
FEA Federal Enterprise Architecture
FEA-CRM Federated Enterprise Architecture-Consolidated Reference Model
FEA-RM Federal Enterprise Architecture Reference Model
FIPS Federal Information Processing Standard
FISMA Federal Information Security Management Act
GAO Government Accountability Office
GIG Global Information Grid
IC Intelligence Community
ICD Initial Capabilities Document
IDEAS International Defence Enterprise Architecture Specification
IDEF0 Integration Definition for Activity Modeling
265
=== page 266 ===
Glossary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/glossary.html[3/3/2011 3:34:20 PM]
IE Information Environment
IEA Information Enterprise Architecture
INFOSEC Information Security
IP Internet Protocol
IRTPA Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004
ISE Information Sharing Environment
ISE-EAF Information Sharing Environment Enterprise Architecture Framework
ISM Information Security Marking
ISO International Standards Organization
IT Information Technology
ITS/NSS Information Technology/National Security Systems
JCA Joint Capability Area
JCIDS Joint Capability Integration and Development System
JCPAT Joint C4I Program Assessment Tool
JCS Joint Chiefs of Staff
JCSFL Joint Common System Function List
JFCOM Joint Forces Command
JMETL Joint Mission Essential Task List
KM/DS Knowledge Management/Decision Support
LDM Logical Data Model
M3 MODAF Meta Model
MDA Milestone Decision Authority
MDR Metadata Registry
MOD Ministry of Defence
MODAF Ministry of Defence Architecture Framework
NAERG Naval Architecture Elements Reference Guide
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NCDS Net Centric Data Strategy
NCE Net-Centric Environment
NCSS Net-Centric Services Strategy
NII Networks and Information Integration
NIST National Institutes for Standards & Technology
NSS National Security Systems
OASD Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense
OASIS Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards
OMB Office of Management and Budget
OMG Object Management Group
266
=== page 267 ===
Glossary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/glossary.html[3/3/2011 3:34:20 PM]
OO Object-Oriented
OOAD Object-Oriented Analysis & Design
OSD Office of the Secretary of Defense
OUSD Office of the Undersecretary of Defense
OV Operational Viewpoint
PDA Personal Digital Assistant
PDCA Plan, Do, Check, and Act
PDM Physical Data Model
PES Physical Exchange Specification
PFD Process Flow Diagram
PL Public Law
POM Program Objective Memorandum
PPBE Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution
PRM Performance Reference Model
PTD Process Task Dependency
PV Project Viewpoint
RA References Architecture
RM Reference Model
SADT Structured Analysis and Design Technique
SE Systems Engineering
SEP Systems Engineering Plan
SIPRNET Secret IP Router Network
SLC Shelf Life Code
SOA Service-Oriented Architecture
SRM Service Component Reference Model
SV Systems Viewpoint
TA Tiered Accountability
TAFIM Technical Architecture for Information Management
TEMPEST Transient Electromagnetic Pulse Emanation Standard
TOGAF The Open Group Architecture Framework
TRM Technical Reference Model
TV Technical Standards View
TWG Technical Working Groups
U.S. United States
UJTL Universal Joint Task List
UK United Kingdom
UML Unified Modeling Language
267
=== page 268 ===
Glossary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/glossary.html[3/3/2011 3:34:20 PM]
UPDM Unified Profile for DoDAF and MODAF
URL Uniform Resource Locator
USD Under Secretary of Defense
V&V Validation & Verification
WBS Work Breakdown Structure
XML eXtensible Markup Language
XSD XML Schema Definition
 
Glossary
Term Definition
Activity
Work, not
 specific to a single organization, weapon system or
individual that transforms inputs (Resources) into outputs
(Resources) or changes their state.
Adaptability
Measure
A measure of the ease with which Performers satisfy differing
Constraints and Capability and Service needs.
Address
The name of a location along with the location-finding scheme
that allows a location to be found from the name. Examples
include postal address, email address, URL, datalink address.
Agreement A consent among parties regarding the terms and conditions of
activities that said parties participate in.
Capability
The ability to achieve a Desired Effect under specified
[performance] standards and conditions through combinations of
ways and means [activities and resources] to perform a set of
activities.
Condition The state of an environment or situation in which a Performer
performs.
Constraint The range of permissible states for an object.
Country A political state or nation or its territory.
Data
Representation of information in a formalized manner suitable for
communication, interpretation, or processing by humans or by
automatic means. Examples could be whole models, packages,
entities, attributes, classes, domain values, enumeration values,
records, tables, rows, columns, and fields.
Desired Effect The result, outcome, or consequence of an action [activity].
Domain
Information
Types of information within the scope or domain of the
architecture.
Effects
Measure Category of measures on Effect Objects
Facility
A real property entity consisting of underlying land and one or
more of the following: a building, a structure (including linear
structures), a utility system, or pavement.
Functional
Standard
Functional standards set forth rules, conditions, guidelines, and
characteristics.
268
=== page 269 ===
Glossary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/glossary.html[3/3/2011 3:34:20 PM]
GeoFeature An object that encompasses meteorological, geographic, and
control features mission significance
GeoPolitical
Extent
A geospatial extent whose boundaries are by declaration or
agreement by political parties.
Guidance An authoritative statement intended to lead or steer the
execution of actions.
Information
Information is the state of a something of interest that is
materialized -- in any medium or form -- and communicated or
received.
Installation
A base, camp, post, station, yard, center, or other activity,
including leased facilities, without regard to the duration of
operational control. An installation may include one or more sites.
Location A point or extent in space that may be referred to physically or
logically.
Maintainability
Measure
A category of measures of the amount of time a Performer is able
to conduct Activities over some time interval.
Materiel
Equipment, apparatus or supplies that are of interest, without
distinction as to its application for administrative or combat
purposes.
Measure The magnitude of some attribute of an individual.
Measure Type A category of Measures
Needs
Satisfaction
Measure
A category of quality measures that address how well a system
meets the user's needs and requirements.
Organization A specific real-world assemblage of people and other resources
organized for an on-going purpose.
Organizational
Measure
A category of quality measures that address how costly a
Performer is to operate and maintain.
Performance
Measure
A category of quality measures that address how well a Performer
meets Capability needs.
Performer
Any entity - human, automated, or any aggregation of human
and/or automated - that performs an activity and provides a
capability.
Person Type A category of persons defined by the role or roles they share that
are relevant to an architecture.
Physical
Measure
A category of measures of spatio-temporal extent of an Individual
such as length, mass, energy, velocity
Port An interface (logical or physical) provided by a System.
Project A temporary endeavor undertaken to create Resources or Desired
Effects.
Real Property Land and improvements to land (i.e., facilities).
Region Of
Country
A large, usually continuous segment of a political state or nation
or its territory.
Region Of
World A large, usually continuous segment of a surface or space; area.
269
=== page 270 ===
Glossary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/glossary.html[3/3/2011 3:34:20 PM]
Resource Data, Information, Performers, Materiel, or Personnel Types that
are produced or consumed.
Rule A principle or condition that governs behavior; a prescribed guide
for conduct or action
Service
A mechanism to enable access to a set of one or more capabilities
, where the access is provided using a prescribed interface and is
exercised consistent with constraints and policies as specified by
the service description. The mechanism is a Performer. The
“capabilities” accessed are Resources -- Information, Data,
Materiel, Performers, and Geo-political Extents.
Service
Channel
A logical or physical communication path between requisitions
and services.
Service
Description
Information necessary to interact with the service in such terms
as the service inputs, outputs, and associated semantics. The
service description also conveys what is accomplished when the
service is invoked and the conditions for using the service.
Service Level A measurement of the performance of a system or service.
Service Port
A part of a Performer that specifics a distinct interaction point
through which the Performer interacts with other Performers. This
isolates dependencies between performers to particular
interaction points rather than to the performer as a whole.
Site
Physical (geographic) location that is or was owned by, leased to,
or otherwise possessed. Each site is assigned to a single
installation. A site may exist in one of three forms: (1) Land only,
where there are no facilities present and where the land consists
of either a single land parcel or two or more contiguous land
parcels. (2) Facility or facilities only, where the underlying land is
neither owned nor controlled by the government. A stand-alone
facility can be a site. If a facility is not a stand-alone facility, it
must be assigned to a site. (3). Land and all the facilities thereon,
where the land consists of either a single land parcel or two or
more contiguous land parcels.
Skill The ability, coming from one's knowledge, practice, aptitude, etc.,
to do something well.
Spatial
Measure
A category of measures of the spatio-temporal location of an
Individual.
Standard
A formal agreement documenting generally accepted
specifications or criteria for products, processes, procedures,
policies, systems, and/or personnel.
System A functionally, physically, and/or behaviorally related group of
regularly interacting or interdependent elements.
Technical
Standard
Technical standards document specific technical methodologies
and practices to design and implement.
Temporal
Measure A type of measure of time
Vision
An end that describes the future state of the enterprise, without
regard to how it is to be achieved; a mental image of what the
future will or could be like
 
270
=== page 271 ===
Glossary
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/glossary.html[3/3/2011 3:34:20 PM]
 
Go to top of page ↑
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
271
=== page 272 ===
DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.0 Sitemap
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/sitemap.html[3/3/2011 3:34:23 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF V2.0 Sitemap
 
Introduction, Overview,
 and Concepts: Introduces DoD architecture concepts and
provides general guidance for development, use, and management of DoD architectures to
help non-technical users understand the role of architecture in support of major decision
support processes. The Primary audiences are Executives, Project Directors, & Managers. The
resources are:
Background information for DoDAF.
Defining “Fit-for-Purpose” Architectures.
An overview of the Framework, DoDAF-based architecture development guidelines,
and the historical background for DoDAF.
An Introduction to Enterprise Architecture, Federated Architecting, and Architecture
Enterprise Services, and an introduction to the Federal Enterprise Architecture
published by the OMB.
An overview for architecture planning.
Addressing customer requirements in architecture development.
Methodology for architecture development.
Presentation methods and graphical views.
The DM2 Conceptual Model.
Analytics in support of architecture-based management analysis.
Security considerations for Architecture
Guidance on configuration management (CM) of architectures, and the CM process for
DoDAF.
Relationships among DoDAF and other architecture frameworks.
Architectural Data and Models. Describes the Meta-model data groups, and their
associated models from a technical viewpoint. The primary audience are architects, program
managers, portfolio managers, and other technically oriented architecture users. The
resources are:
The Logical Data Model and the Meta-model Data Groups.
DoDAF Views and Models.
Mapping of DM2 concepts to DoDAF-described Models.
DoDAF Meta-model Physical Exchange Specification (DM2 PES).  Relates the  CDM structure,
LDM relationships, associations, and business rules. The PES provides the constructs needed
to enable exchange of data and derived information among users and COIs.
 
DoDAF Journal
The
 DoDAF Journal is a community of interest based discussion board. The Journal includes
descriptions of best practices, lessons learned, example views and DM2 datasets, DoDAF
model templates, DoDAF meeting presentations, and tutorial materials, and reference
documents. It can be used by reference, component, capability, segment, and solution
architects and core process stakeholders. Any member of the DoDAF community may submit
material for publication and an editorial board will work with the authors to determine
appropriateness, ensure public releasability, and make any needed changes to content.
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
272
=== page 273 ===
DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.0 Sitemap
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/sitemap.html[3/3/2011 3:34:23 PM]
 
Go to top of page ↑
 
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
273
=== page 274 ===
DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.0 Archives
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/archives.html[3/3/2011 3:34:26 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF Archives
 
DoD Architecture
 Framework (DoDAF) v1.5
Volume I
Volume II
Volume III
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
 
 
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
274
=== page 275 ===
DoDAF Journal
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal.html[3/3/2011 3:33:38 PM]
Architecture Processes
Constructing an AV-2 & Architecture
Primitives
Constructing an OV-6 w/ Architecture
Primitives
Planning for Quality
Governance
Architecture Governance
Models
Component Models
Deployment Operational Models
Architecture Evaluation
Architecture Maturity: The PDCA Cycle
Architecture Self-Assessment
Compliance Review
Architecture Support in Decision Making
DoDAF V2.0 Exemplars
UPDM Search and Rescue (SAR) Diagrams
and DoDAF 2 Markups
UPDM SAR DM2 PES XML Example files
Fit For Purpose Example
Capability Analysis
DoDAF V2.0 Journal
The DoDAF Journal is a community of interest based discussion
board. The Journal includes descriptions of best practices,
lessons learned, example views and DM2 datasets, DoDAF model
templates, DoDAF meeting presentations, and tutorial materials,
and reference documents. It can be used by reference,
component, capability, segment, and solution architects and core
process stakeholders. Any member of the DoDAF community
may submit material for publication and an editorial board will
work with the authors to determine appropriateness, ensure
public releasability, and make any needed changes to content.
DoDAF Resources
 Plenary Presentations
(12 AUG 10)
 DoD EA Conference
2010 Presentations
Best Practices/Guidelines
- AV-2 Design
- OV-6c Design
 FAQs
 Journal Archives
 DoDAF-DM2 WG
 Contact Us
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
DoDAF
News/Events
DoD EA Conference 2011
Hampton, VA April 11-15
Registration will be at:
www.dodenterprisearchitecture.org
Co-hosted by DoD CIO
Architecture and Infrastructure
Directorate and Joint Staff
Director's Corner
Welcome to the DoDAF
Journal. The DoDAF Journal
is a community of interest
based discussion board. The
Journal includes descriptions of
best practices, lessons
learned, example views and
DM2 datasets, DoDAF model
templates, DoDAF meeting
presentations, and tutorial
materials, and reference
documents.
Privacy Policy
Web Policy
 
275
=== page 276 ===
DoDAF Plenary Presentations 12 AUG 10
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/plenary.html[3/3/2011 3:36:18 PM]
Architecture Processes
Constructing an AV-2 & Architecture
Primitives
Constructing an OV-6 w/ Architecture
Primitives
Planning for Quality
Governance
Architecture Governance
Models
Component Models
Deployment Operational Models
Architecture Evaluation
Architecture Maturity: The PDCA Cycle
Architecture Self-Assessment
Compliance Review
Architecture Support in Decision Making
DoDAF V2.0 Exemplars
UPDM Search and Rescue (SAR) Diagrams
and DoDAF 2 Markups
UPDM SAR DM2 PES XML Example files
Fit For Purpose Example
Capability Analysis
Journal Home >> Plenary Presentations 12 AUG 10
  
What's New in DoDAF - DM2 V2.02
(Dave McDaniel)
DoDAF Training
(Walt Okon/Samantha Stokes)
DoDAF 2.0 Architectural Models-Views and Descriptions
(Shelton Lee)
DoDAF V2.0 Architecture Exemplars and Templates
(Shelton Lee)
JFCOM Joint Mission Thread (JMT) & DoDAF-DM2 Mapping
(Dave Dryer)
ASRG Update
(Alan Golombek)
UPDM Update
(Len Levine)
Model and Data Interchange at OMG
(Len Levine)
  
DoDAF Resources
 Plenary Presentations
(12 AUG 10)
 DoD EA Conference
2010 Presentations
Best Practices/Guidelines
- AV-2 Design
- OV-6c Design
 
 FAQs
 Journal Archives
 DoDAF-DM2 WG
 Contact Us
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
DoDAF
News/Events
DoD EA Conference 2011
Hampton, VA April 11-15
Registration will be at:
www.dodenterprisearchitecture.org
Co-hosted by DoD CIO
Architecture and Infrastructure
Directorate and Joint Staff
Director's Corner
Welcome to the DoDAF
Journal. The DoDAF Journal
is a community of interest
based discussion board. The
Journal includes descriptions of
best practices, lessons
learned, example views and
DM2 datasets, DoDAF model
templates, DoDAF meeting
presentations, and tutorial
materials, and reference
documents.
Privacy Policy
Web Policy
 
276
=== page 277 ===
DoD EA Conference 2010 Presentations
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/EA_conf_2010.html[3/3/2011 3:36:21 PM]
Architecture Processes
Constructing an AV-2 & Architecture
Primitives
Constructing an OV-6 w/ Architecture
Primitives
Planning for Quality
Governance
Architecture Governance
Models
Component Models
Deployment Operational Models
Architecture Evaluation
Architecture Maturity: The PDCA Cycle
Architecture Self-Assessment
Compliance Review
Architecture Support in Decision Making
DoDAF V2.0 Exemplars
UPDM Search and Rescue (SAR) Diagrams
and DoDAF 2 Markups
UPDM SAR DM2 PES XML Example files
Fit For Purpose Example
Capability Analysis
Journal Home >> DoD EA Conference 2010
 
Presentations:
DoDAF V2.0 Update
UPDM Search & Recue (SAR) Exemplars
DoDAF V2.0 SAR Analysis and Fit-for-Purpose Exemplar
DoDAF V2.0 Way Ahead
  
DoDAF Resources
 Plenary Presentations
(12 AUG 10)
 DoD EA Conference
2010 Presentations
Best Practices/Guidelines
- AV-2 Design
- OV-6c Design
 
 FAQs
 Journal Archives
 DoDAF-DM2 WG
 Contact Us
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
DoDAF
News/Events
DoD EA Conference 2011
Hampton, VA April 11-15
Registration will be at:
www.dodenterprisearchitecture.org
Co-hosted by DoD CIO
Architecture and Infrastructure
Directorate and Joint Staff
Director's Corner
Welcome to the DoDAF
Journal. The DoDAF Journal
is a community of interest
based discussion board. The
Journal includes descriptions of
best practices, lessons
learned, example views and
DM2 datasets, DoDAF model
templates, DoDAF meeting
presentations, and tutorial
materials, and reference
documents.
Privacy Policy
Web Policy
 
277
=== page 278 ===
DoDAF Journal FAQs
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_FAQ.html[3/3/2011 3:36:23 PM]
Journal Home >> DoDAF FAQs
- Is DoDAF V2.0 mandatory?
- Do I have to create all those DoDAF-described Models?
- What must architecture tools do to comply with DoDAF V2.0?
- Where can I see exemplars of each DoDAF-described model?
- Is DoDAF useful outside DoD?
- When developing the viewpoints, do we have to list or show processes controlled
by software, such as "receive crew data", "transmit crew data", "render crew data"
or "process crew data", "provide transmit data"?
- How is server/workstation processing indicated in the architecture?
- What does DoDAF 2 consider an "External Performer" and how does the DM2
handle it?
- The DM2 appears very abstract. Is it just for guidance?
- The mathematics of the DM2 are difficult to learn. Is this really necessary?
- What is IDEAS?
- Is there a scientific basis for the DM2 and IDEAS?
- How do DM2 and IDEAS relate to OWL?
- Are there tools for DM2?
- IDEAS applies mathematics that are not normally taught in IT curriculums and so
some learning is required. How do you learn IDEAS?
- Why was UML used for the DM2 Logical Data Model instead of an ontology tool?
- Why did this mathematics suddenly emerge as applicable?
- Why is AS&I spearheading the introduction of ontologic mathematics in DM2?
- What’s the difference between ontology and taxonomy?
- I hear the word “ontology” used a lot nowadays. Is it just another IT fad?
- Formal methods in computer science have been around for quite a while. They
usually were too intractable and inaccessible. Why are we adopting them now?
- Some of the IDEAS and DM2 mathematics seem to be esoteric – addressing issues
below the 90% or good enough level. Is this degree of precision really necessary?
- Who’s developing DM2 or IDEAS analysis tools?
- Why are there so many DM2 open action items?
- Is the DM2 done?
- How can the DoDAF / DM2 Working Group be effective if anybody is allowed to
join and participate? Doesn’t it just become chaotic?
- Why didn’t DoD just adopt a commercial standard for EA data exchange?
- Is there a way to represent metrics with DM2 and what kinds?
DoDAF
News/Events
DoD EA Conference 2011
Hampton, VA April 11-15
Registration will be at:
www.dodenterprisearchitecture.org
Co-hosted by DoD CIO
Architecture and Infrastructure
Directorate and Joint Staff
Director's Corner
Welcome to the DoDAF
Journal. The DoDAF Journal
is a community of interest
based discussion board. The
Journal includes descriptions of
best practices, lessons
learned, example views and
DM2 datasets, DoDAF model
templates, DoDAF meeting
presentations, and tutorial
materials, and reference
documents.
Privacy Policy
Web Policy
278
=== page 279 ===
DoDAF Journal FAQs
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_FAQ.html[3/3/2011 3:36:23 PM]
- How are temporal models handled in DM2?
- How are Services modeled in DM2?
- How can I implement the DM2?
- I don’t see how to model requirements vs. solutions in DM2. Is it possible?
 
 
 
Is DoDAF V2.0
 mandatory?
While DoDAF is indeed prescribed for use in the development of architectural descriptions
within the Department, DoDAF V2.0 currently serves as guidance. It is expected, however,
that a growing number of commands and components will adopt V2.0. For such organizations,
architectural descriptions they may have developed in accordance with prior versions of
DoDAF should brought into compliance with V2.0 upon their next major release.   In addition,
architectural
 data should be stored in a data system – PowerPoint, Visio, Excel, etc. can only
be used to present architectural information. For components within which the use of V2.0 is
not mandated, it can still serve as an architecture best practices reference.
Do I have to create all those DoDAF-described Models?
No. DoDAF V2.0 does not prescribe any models – instead, it concentrates on data as the
essential ingredients of any architecture development. It seeks to make architectural
descriptions “Fit-for-Purpose”, based on decision-maker needs. Process owners may therefore
prescribe a specific set of DoDAF-described Models to answer a particular purpose. For
example, regulations and instructions issued by both DoD and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff (CJCS) contain particular requirements with respect to Presentation Views. In general,
whatever combination of views – both DoDAF-described and user-tailored – legitimately
answers a need, aligns well with the intended use of the architecture as a whole, AND can be
justified per common-sense professional practice in architecture, is acceptable.   Consult the
regulations
 and instructions issued by your component for specific model and view
requirements.
Go to top of page ↑
What must architecture tools do to comply with DoDAF V2.0?
It is only necessary to implement the Physical Exchange Specification (PES). Note that while
architecture teams may evaluate tool sets and recommend specific tools based upon their
capabilities in a given architecture environment, DoD does not plan to formally endorse,
adopt, certify, or mandate any tool.
Where can I see exemplars of each DoDAF-described model?
See the DoDAF Journal – a compendium of DoDAF V2.0 background information,
implementation guidance, news, and other content useful to the DoDAF architect and
decision-makers alike.
Is DoDAF useful outside DoD?
Yes! Given the unprecedented, growing, and mutual dependence between DoD, Intelligence
Community (IC), and Coalition architectures, we both encourage and expect the early adoption
of DoDAF V2.0 principles outside the Department. As a vital partner and contributor to our
nation’s defense, the IC should continue to represent a significant portion of the DoDAF user
base.
Go to top of page ↑
When developing the viewpoints, do we have to list or show processes controlled by
software, such as "receive crew data", "transmit crew data", "render crew data" or
"process crew data", "provide transmit data"?
The determination of whether to list the processes controlled by the software is reliant on the
279
=== page 280 ===
DoDAF Journal FAQs
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_FAQ.html[3/3/2011 3:36:23 PM]
purpose of the architecture.   If the  purpose requires the processes controlled by the software,
then it will be required.   However, if
 it is not required at that level, it may be sufficient to
indicate that "Provide Target Location" is the resource flow, rather than having multiple
resource flows "Transmit Target Location data", "Receive Target Location Data", "Acknowledge
Target Location Data", and "Receive Acknowledgement of Target Location Data".
How is server/workstation processing indicated in the architecture?
From a systems or services viewpoint, the server/workstation processes are Activities, but the
related Performer is a System or Service (e.g., "CursorOnTarget Service")."
What does DoDAF 2 consider an "External Performer" and how does the DM2 handle
it?
In DM2, a Performer can be categorized as internal or external, based on specific need,
although such categorization may not be standard across all organizations.  External
Performers do
 not need to be modeled, as DM2 does not require documentation of Activities
other than acknowledgement that an unknown producing or consuming Activity does, in fact,
exist (see UPDM SAR DM2 markup examples).  However, although
 an OV-2 diagram need not
show implied, external Activities, the DM2 PES XML must show them, even if only as
placeholders for subsequent completion such as during OV-5 development.  It is
 this precision
that addresses the “over-specification” problem of earlier DoDAF OVs.
Go to top of page ↑
The DM2 appears very abstract. Is it just for guidance?
No, the DM2 can be used for simple to very detailed and complex architectural descriptions by
combining its elements appropriately. It has few elements making it seem abstract because it
is not language, but mathematically, based. The DM2 Physical Exchange Specification (PES) is
the prescribed data exchange format and semantics for DoDAF 2.0 conformance.
The mathematics of the DM2 are difficult to learn. Is this really necessary?
The predecessor of the DM2, the CADM, was language-based. It was a state-of-the-art Entity-
Relationship model at the time. E-R models have been very successful and useful throughout
the business and government communities. However, the nature of Enterprise Architecture
entails integration and analysis of multiple independently-developed architectural descriptions.
The CADM and E-R models that were name and definition based did not work for this purpose.
Hence, the DM2 has brought to bear additional science to help achieve these DoD EA goals.
What is IDEAS?
IDEAS is the International Defence Enterprise Architecture Specification. It is an international
project of the US , UK , AU, SW, and CA for the past 5 years to develop a way to exchange
EA data in support of Coalition operations. Early on in the project it was recognized that we
needed more precise and unambiguous ways to label data so the science of formal ontologies
was brought to bear. The IDEAS ontology is first-order, extensional, and 4-dimensional,
employing the mathematics of set theory and 4-D mereotopology.
Is there a scientific basis for the DM2 and IDEAS?
Yes, the mathematics and science underpinning DM2 and IDEAS have been in development for
many years, particularly with the development of set theory in the 19th century. What is new
is the application of that science to IT data representations, specifications, and models.
Go to top of page ↑
How do DM2 and IDEAS relate to OWL?
DM2 and IDEAS data can be represented in RDFS and OWL. Pure OWL makes some
commitments that are incompatible with IDEAS so a fallback to the less-committal RDFS was
necessary in those areas. An RDFS/OWL generator for and early version of IDEAS was
developed and will be updated and included in the ModelFutures’ IDEAS Profile soon.
Are there tools for DM2?
A script for generating a DM2 database is available on CD at this conference and on the DM2
280
=== page 281 ===
DoDAF Journal FAQs
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_FAQ.html[3/3/2011 3:36:23 PM]
collaboration site – www.silverbulletinc.com/dm2. A bare-bones front-end (RDF triples
generator) to the database will be available soon. Pilots and early adopters are building tools
to generate and parse DM2. The UPDM Team is working on UPDM 2.0 which will be
compatible with DM2. The AS&I team is working with other EA and M&S tool vendors to
achieve DM2 compatibility. An RDFS/OWL generator is planned that will allow analysis by
RDFS/OWL tools that comport with IDEAS ontology constructs.
IDEAS applies mathematics that are not normally taught in IT curriculums and so
some learning is required. How do you learn IDEAS?
The DM2 collaboration site at www.silverbulletinc.com/dm2 has many resources, including
DM2 description documents (CDM, LDM, PES / IDEAS), an IDEAS bibliography, 1,000’s of
reference documents, and a free electronic version of IDEAS Group member Dr. Chris
Partridge’s book, “Business Objects – Engineering for Reuse.” In addition, on-site outreach
tutorials can be requested through Mike.Wayson@osd.mil, membership in the DM2 Working
Group is open to all by registering at www.silverbulletinc.com/dm2. This science is emerging
as the future for knowledge representation for applications where integration of multiple
heterogeneous data sources or automated algorithmic analysis or processing is required and
so IDEAS learning is professional development that will be applicable to and open up future
career paths.
Why was UML used for the DM2 Logical Data Model instead of an ontology tool?
A UML tool was used for the DM2 LDM. However, it is not a UML class model because the
ModelFutures’ IDEAS Profile turns the UML tool into an ontology tool. Existing ontology tools
make commitments and lack features necessary for IDEAS. Consequently, the ModelFutures’
IDEAS Profile was developed that allows the UML tool be used for ontology development in a
simple yet thorough way.
Go to top of page ↑
Why did this mathematics suddenly emerge as applicable?
As IT has developed, greater indirection has been permissible. In similar vein to Codd’s
introduction of relational databases was enabled by higher performance IT, so too higher
performance IT is now enabling the adoption of ontologic mathematics.
Why is AS&I spearheading the introduction of ontologic mathematics in DM2?
Enterprise Architecture is ambitious in supporting transformational processes in DoD. We know
those transformations must be accomplished so we will have an agile and efficient defense.
That makes it incumbent on AS&I to apply whatever science is needed to support the DoD’s
core processes.
What’s the difference between ontology and taxonomy?
Technically, a taxonomy is a “type” structure, much like naïve set theory but with provisions
to prevent paradoxes. So a taxonomy may represent categorizations of real world things (e.g.,
a simple set), subsets and super sets, categorizations of sets, and so on. An ontology goes
beyond this an includes other types of relationships between concepts such as whole-part,
overlaps, temporal whole-parts, etc.
I hear the word “ontology” used a lot nowadays. Is it just another IT fad?
Yes and no. As in all progressions in IT, there tends to be a bit of overselling. No doubt some
ontology projects will fail to live up to expectations. There are many challenges in developing
automation, whether for data integration or analysis, as there always have been. However,
the newly adopted tools of ontology science – e.g., applying set theory, mereotopology, and
4-dimensionalism – will be long-lasting contributions.
Go to top of page ↑
Formal methods in computer science have been around for quite a while. They
usually were too intractable and inaccessible. Why are we adopting them now?
The key to simultaneously achieving user understandability and rigorous formality in the DM2
281
=== page 282 ===
DoDAF Journal FAQs
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_FAQ.html[3/3/2011 3:36:23 PM]
is the layering: the Conceptual Data Model (CDM), Logical Data Model (LDM), Physical
Exchange Specification (PES), and IDEAS Foundation. The formality in DM2 is largely hidden
in the IDEAS Foundation layer which most users will never need to look at or understand.
Some of the IDEAS and DM2 mathematics seem to be esoteric – addressing issues
below the 90% or good enough level. Is this degree of precision really necessary?
90% level disambiguation and semantic precision works well for human-readable and
interpreted data, as we fill-in missing information and bring to bear interpretive knowledge or
for rehearsed automated processing -- when the programmers or database administrators can
iterate and trial-and-error towards proper processing of the exchanged data. Automated
processing by non-rehearsed algorithms, e.g., by integration or analysis algorithms by
heretofore new data sources, can be very sensitive to flaws in datasets such as imprecisions,
ambiguities, or unstated incompletions.
Who’s developing DM2 or IDEAS analysis tools?
This is just starting. We anticipate at least these two categories: M&S tools and entailment
tools. M&S tools will be able to ingest DM2 datasets and, because of the precision and
disambiguity afforded by DM2, be able to “run” or “execute” the architectural models to
measure performance and/or effectiveness of proposed architectures. Entailment tools, some
of which exist today and can operate on RDF, RDFS, and OWL datasets, will be able to carry
out the logical implications of DM2 datasets whereupon contradictions and inconsistencies can
be detected. For instance, an interoperability assessment tool might entail that two systems
need to interact in some way (e.g., exchange data) but that is contradicted by all the means
available to do so.
Go to top of page ↑
Why are there so many DM2 open action items?
The application of ontology science to Enterprise Architecture descriptions is new. There are
still many things the community does not yet know how to represent mathematically. We
could always fall back on language-based representations but we know that will result in
improperly integrated or analyzed data. In other words, the DM2 Working Group is the forum
for clearly defining and disambiguating EA concepts in the DoD. Membership in the DM2
Working Group is open to all by registering at www.silverbulletinc.com/dm2. The DoDAF /
DM2 Action Item tracker is updated weekly and is available for download there.
Is the DM2 done?
Yes! Version 2.0 was baselined May 2009 and version 2.01, with 68 fixes and improvements,
was baselined Feb 2010. However, as the DoD EA community seeks to represent additional
things, as DM2 pilots and early adopters develop, and as concepts evolve – e.g., Services,
Capabilities – the DM2 will respond to the community’s needs. This done by a formal
Configuration Management (CM) process by the DM2 Working Group, a subordinate body to
the Federated Architecture Council (FAC). Membership in the DM2 WG is open to all by
registering at www.silverbulletinc.com/dm2.
How can the DoDAF / DM2 Working Group be effective if anybody is allowed to join
and participate? Doesn’t it just become chaotic?
Remarkably, the WG is very effective even with 100’s of members. The reason for this is the
process and business rules established and documented in the DoDAF / DM2 Configuration
Management (CM) Plan which can be obtained at the DM2 Collaboration Site,
www.silverbulletinc.com/dm2. Although the process and rules are subject to modification, once
agreed-to, they provide a principled basis for discussion, debate, and analysis of potential
issues.
Why didn’t DoD just adopt a commercial standard for EA data exchange?
Existing commercial data exchange formats do not meet the representation requirements for
DoDAF architectural descriptions or are tool or tool-type specific. For instance, the XMI UML
model interchange standard is specific to UML tools and consequently has many elements that
are not applicable to non-UML tools. The DM2 Conceptual and Logical Data Models are the
282
=== page 283 ===
DoDAF Journal FAQs
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_FAQ.html[3/3/2011 3:36:23 PM]
Architecture Processes
Constructing an AV-2 & Architecture
Primitives
Constructing an OV-6 w/ Architecture
Primitives
Planning for Quality
Architecture Evaluation
Architecture Maturity: The PDCA Cycle
Architecture Self-Assessment
Compliance Review
Architecture Support in Decision Making
DoD expression of required data semantics for EA descriptions; the DM2 Physical Exchange
Specification (PES) is a simple tool- and methodology-neutral format for EA data exchange
between databases, repositories, EA development tools, EA analysis tools, authoritative data
sources, EA reporting tools, and M&S tools.
Go to top of page ↑
Is there a way to represent metrics with DM2 and what kinds?
The DM2 represents metrics as in IDEAS as what may be thought of a “measure sets.” The
DM2 defined several broad categories of metrics (measures) and then allows users to define
as many additional types of measures as needed. Measures can be associated with any DoDAF
concepts, e.g., Systems, Resource Flows, Capabilities, Desired Effects. Measures can be at a
technical performance level (e.g., MOPs) up to operational effectiveness levels (e.g., MOEs).
How are temporal models handled in DM2?
DM2 is founded on IDEAS which is 4-dimensional. So all real-world things are modeled as per
their spatial and temporal extent. In other words, everything in DM2 is temporal. DM2 and
IDEAS have elements for temporal boundaries and before-after and temporal-whole-part
relationships to model any form of temporal behavior. For more on 4-dimensionalism, see,
e.g., http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four-dimensionalism or a very popular book, Sider,
Theodore; “Four Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time”; Oxford University
Press, Oxford ; 2001.
How are Services modeled in DM2?
The DoD defines services as a mechanism to access capabilities (or resources.) The DM2
models Services as types of Performers that have a Service Port that is described by a Service
Description. The Service has relationships to the Resources that are accessed. The Service
Description is a type of Architectural Description and so it can have all the structure of an
Architectural Description, including functionality, behavior, rules, information schemas, etc.
New service concepts emerging from OASIS, OMG, and other organizations are being
considered by the DM2 Working Group for incorporation in later DM2 baseline versions.
How can I implement the DM2?
All DM2 implementers should join the DM2 Working Group so they will be up to date on all
developments, actions in-progress, and gain access to DM2 resources. In addition, the DoDAF
/ DM2 AS&I has resources to assist DM2 pilots and early adopters. Contact
Mike.Wayson@osd.mil to request assistance in your pilot or implementation project.
I don’t see how to model requirements vs. solutions in DM2. Is it possible?
Yes! DM2 supports multiple levels of reification, indeed, as many as are needed by your
project. Each level of reification is an architectural description that becomes rules that
constrain the next level. Conversely, each artifact at a level can trace its pedigree to a higher
level using DM2’s Pedigree model. With DoDAF 2, you are no longer restricted to just the OV
“requirements” level and SV/TV “solution” level, but can have as many levels of reification as
are needed, with each level having whatever mix of operational, capability, systems, services,
or technical description as is appropriate for your project.
 
Go to top of page ↑
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
283
=== page 284 ===
DoDAF Journal FAQs
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_FAQ.html[3/3/2011 3:36:23 PM]
Governance
Architecture Governance
Models
Component Models
Deployment Operational Models
DoDAF V2.0 Exemplars
UPDM Search and Rescue (SAR) Diagrams
and DoDAF 2 Markups
UPDM SAR DM2 PES XML Example files
Fit For Purpose Example
Capability Analysis
 
284
=== page 285 ===
DoDAF Journal Archives
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_archive.html[3/3/2011 3:36:27 PM]
Architecture Processes
Constructing an AV-2 & Architecture
Primitives
Constructing an OV-6 w/ Architecture
Primitives
Planning for Quality
Governance
Architecture Governance
Models
Component Models
Deployment Operational Models
Architecture Evaluation
Architecture Maturity: The PDCA Cycle
Architecture Self-Assessment
Compliance Review
Architecture Support in Decision Making
DoDAF V2.0 Exemplars
UPDM Search and Rescue (SAR) Diagrams
and DoDAF 2 Markups
UPDM SAR DM2 PES XML Example files
Fit For Purpose Example
Capability Analysis
Journal Home >> DoDAF Journal Archives
 
Archived DoDAF Journal Content
Content
Archived
Date
Archived
Replacement
Content
Notes
AV-2 Design 22 Dec 09 AV-2 Design  
OV-6c Design 22 Dec 09 OV-6c Design  
Essential DoDAF 03 Feb 11   
 
------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
DoDAF
News/Events
DoD EA Conference 2011
Hampton, VA April 11-15
Registration will be at:
www.dodenterprisearchitecture.org
Co-hosted by DoD CIO
Architecture and Infrastructure
Directorate and Joint Staff
Director's Corner
Welcome to the DoDAF
Journal. The DoDAF Journal
is a community of interest
based discussion board. The
Journal includes descriptions of
best practices, lessons
learned, example views and
DM2 datasets, DoDAF model
templates, DoDAF meeting
presentations, and tutorial
materials, and reference
documents.
Privacy Policy
Web Policy
 
285
=== page 286 ===
DoDAF Journal Contacts
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/journal_contact.html[3/3/2011 3:36:30 PM]
Architecture Processes
Constructing an AV-2 & Architecture
Primitives
Constructing an OV-6 w/ Architecture
Primitives
Planning for Quality
Governance
Architecture Governance
Models
Component Models
Deployment Operational Models
Architecture Evaluation
Architecture Maturity: The PDCA Cycle
Architecture Self-Assessment
Compliance Review
Architecture Support in Decision Making
DoDAF V2.0 Exemplars
UPDM Search and Rescue (SAR) Diagrams
and DoDAF 2 Markups
UPDM SAR DM2 PES XML Example files
Fit For Purpose Example
Capability Analysis
Journal Home >> DoDAF V2.0 Journal Contacts
 
Policy Issues for
 DoDAF:
Michael Wayson, Michael.Wayson@osd.mil,
(703) 607-0482
For DoDAF:
Shelton Lee, shelton.lee@lmco.com,
(703) 916-7340
For DoDAF Meta-model (DM2):
Dave McDaniel, davem@silverbulletinc.com,
(703) 892-6062
  
Submit website recommendations or comments
DoDAF Resources
 Plenary Presentations
(12 AUG 10)
 DoD EA Conference
2010 Presentations
 
Best Practices/Guidelines
- AV-2 Design
- OV-6c Design
 
 FAQs
 Journal Archives
 DoDAF-DM2 WG
 Contact Us
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
DoDAF
News/Events
DoD EA Conference 2011
Hampton, VA April 11-15
Registration will be at:
www.dodenterprisearchitecture.org
Co-hosted by DoD CIO
Architecture and Infrastructure
Directorate and Joint Staff
Director's Corner
Welcome to the DoDAF
Journal. The DoDAF Journal
is a community of interest
based discussion board. The
Journal includes descriptions of
best practices, lessons
learned, example views and
DM2 datasets, DoDAF model
templates, DoDAF meeting
presentations, and tutorial
materials, and reference
documents.
Privacy Policy
Web Policy
 
286
=== page 287 ===
DoDAF Contacts
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/contact.html[3/3/2011 3:33:47 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
DoDAF V2.0 Contacts
Policy Issues for DoDAF:
Michael Wayson, Michael.Wayson@osd.mil, (703) 607-0482
For DoDAF:
Shelton Lee, shelton.lee@lmco.com, (703) 916-7340
For DoDAF Meta-model (DM2):
Dave McDaniel, davem@silverbulletinc.com, (703) 892-6062
 
Contact DoDAF
 Website Administrator:
richard.k.myers@lmco.com
or submit form below for any website recommendations, changes or comments.
Name:
Email:
Telephone:
Organization:
Subject:
Comment/Request:
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Department of Defense
287
=== page 288 ===
DoDAF Contacts
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/contact.html[3/3/2011 3:33:47 PM]
 
 
Go to top of page ↑
 
 
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
288
=== page 289 ===
DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.0 Links
http://cio-nii.defense.gov/sites/dodaf20/links.html[3/3/2011 3:33:40 PM]
 
Home DoDAF-DM2 WG DoDAF Journal DoD Meta Data Registry IDEAS Links
Links to Resources
 
Defense Knowledge Online DoDAF Homepage (requires login or CAC)
Ministry of Defence Architecture Framework
International Defence Enterprise Architecture Specification
DARS: DoD Architecture Registry System (DARS)
DoD MDR: Metadata Registry
DoD IEA: Department of Defense Information Enterprise Architecture (DoD IEA)
 
 
 
Background
Architecture Development
Meta Model
Viewpoints & Models
Presentation Techniques
Configuration Management
Overview
Acronyms List and Glossary
of Terms
Site Map
Archives
 
Site Map
Department of Defense
Privacy Policy | Web Policy | Contacts
289
