=== page 1 ===
January 2020
GAO-20-48G
Assessment Guide
Technology 
Readiness
Best Practices for Evaluating the Readiness of Technology 
for Use in Acquisition Programs and Projects
=== page 2 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page i GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Preface  1 
Introduction 4 
What is a Technology Readiness Assessment? 9 
Why TRAs are Important and Understanding their Features 24 
The Characteristics of a High-Quality TRA and a Reliable Process 
for Conducting Them 32 
Step 1 – Prepare the TRA Plan and Select the TRA Team 38 
Step 2 – Identify the Critical Technologies 47 
Step 3 – Assess the Critical Technologies 63 
Step 4 – Prepare the TRA Report 71 
Step 5 – Use the TRA Report Findings 80 
Technology Maturation Plans 88 
TRAs and Software Development 97 
Development of System-level Readiness Measures 100 
Glossary 103 
Appendix I Objectives, Scope, and Methodology 105 
 
Appendix II Key Questions to Assess How Well Programs Followed the  
Five Step Process for Conducting a TRA 106 
 
Appendix III Case Study Backgrounds 110 
 
Appendix IV Examples of Various TRL Definitions and Descriptions by  
Organization 115 
 
Appendix V Other Types of Readiness Levels 122 
 
Appendix VI Agency Websites where TRA Report Examples can be Found 128 
 
Contents  
=== page 3 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page ii GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Appendix VII Experts Who Helped Develop This Guide 129 
 
Appendix VIII Contacts and Acknowledgments 135 
 
References  136 
Image Sources 142 
 
Tables 
Table 1: Cost and Schedule Experiences for Products with Mature 
and Immature Technologies 27 
Table 2: Five Steps for Conducting a Technology Readiness 
Assessment (TRA) and Associated Best Practices and 
Characteristics 35 
Table 3: Software Implementation Project Work Breakdown 
Structure 55 
Table 4: Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) and the 
Information Needed to Demonstrate Them for Hardware 
and Software 66 
Table 5: Examples of Program Management Tools and Analytical 
Approaches Used with Technology Readiness 
Assessments (TRAs) 86 
Table 6: GAO Reports Used as Case Study in the TRA Guide 110 
Table 7: DOD Technology Readiness Levels (2011) 115 
Table 8: DOD Software Technology Readiness Levels (2009) 115 
Table 9: NASA Hardware Technology Readiness Levels (2013) 116 
Table 10: NASA Software Technology Readiness Levels (2013) 117 
Table 11: DOE Technology Readiness Levels (2011) 118 
Table 12: Department of Transportation Technology Readiness 
Levels (2017) 120 
Table 13: DOD Manufacturing Readiness Levels 122 
Table 14: Integration Readiness Levels 125 
Table 15: System Readiness Levels 126 
Table 16: Experts Who Made Significant Contributions 129 
Table 17: Experts Who Made Noteworthy Contributions 130 
Figures 
Figure 1: Technology Readiness Levels (TRL) 11 
=== page 4 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page iii GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 2: Phased Acquisition or Project Life-Cycle with Decision 
Points 14 
Figure 3: Illustration of Technology Readiness Assessments 
(TRA) in a Program’s Integrated Schedule 23 
Figure 4: Five Steps for Conducting a High-Quality Technology 
Readiness Assessment (TRA) 35 
Figure 5: Four Steps for Selecting Critical Technologies (CT) 52 
Figure 6: A Common Element Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) 53 
Figure 7: A Contract Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) 54 
Figure 8: A Process Technology Flow Diagram (simplified) 57 
Figure 9: Three Steps to Evaluate Critical Technologies (CT) 64 
Figure 10: Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) Report 
Template 73 
Figure 11: Five Steps to Prepare the Technology Readiness 
Assessment (TRA) Report 74 
Figure 12: Acquisition or Project Life-cycle with Technology 
Readiness Assessments (TRA) at Decision Points for 
Governance 83 
Figure 13: Five Steps to Prepare a Technology Maturation Plan 
(TMP) 89 
Figure 14: Technology Maturation Plan (TMP) Template 94 
Figure 14: Technology Maturation Plan (TMP) Template 
(continued) 95 
 
  
=== page 5 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page iv GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 
CDR  Critical Design Review 
CT  critical technologies 
DOD   U.S. Department of Defense  
DOE   U.S. Department of Energy 
EMD  Engineering and Manufacturing Development 
IRL  integration readiness level 
MDA  Milestone Decision Authority 
MDAP  Major Defense Acquisition Program 
MRL  manufacturing readiness level 
NASA   National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
SRA  systems readiness assessment 
SRL  system readiness level 
TMP  technology maturation plan 
TRA  technology readiness assessment  
TRL  technology readiness level  
WBS  work breakdown structure 
This Guide is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in 
the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety 
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain 
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be 
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. 
=== page 6 ===
 
 
 
Page 1 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
441 G St. N.W. 
Washington, DC 20548 
 
Federal agencies spend billions of dollars each year to develop, acquire, 
and build major systems, facilities, and equipment, including fighter 
aircraft, nuclear waste treatment facilities, electronic baggage screening 
equipment, and telescopes for exploring the universe. Managing these 
complex acquisitions has been a long-standing challenge for federal 
agencies. 
Many of the government’s most costly and complex acquisition programs 
require the development of cutting-edge technologies and their integration 
into large and complex systems. Such acquisition efforts may also use 
existing technologies, but in new applications or environments. For two 
decades, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) has shown 
that using effective management practices and processes to assess how 
far a technology has matured and how this has been demonstrated are 
fundamental to evaluating its readiness to be integrated into a system and 
managed for risk in the federal government’s major acquisitions. 
A technology readiness assessment (TRA) is a systematic, evidence-
based process that evaluates the maturity of technologies (hardware, 
software, and processes) critical to the performance of a larger system or 
the fulfillment of the key objectives of an acquisition program, including 
cost and schedule.1 TRAs, which evaluate the technical maturity of a 
technology at a specific point in time for inclusion into a larger system, do 
not eliminate technology risk. But when done well, they can illuminate 
concerns and serve as the basis for realistic discussions on how to 
address potential risks as programs move from the early research and 
technology development to system development and beyond.2 In 
addition, TRAs help legislators, government officials, and the public hold 
government programs accountable for achieving technology performance 
goals. 
                                                                                                                       
1In this Guide, we use the term “program,” but some agencies may make distinctions 
between programs, projects, and products. For the purposes of this Guide, these terms 
can be used interchangeably to accommodate an agency’s particular application. The 
methodology developed in this Guide is intended for use in any acquisition, program, 
project, or product that benefits from the use of TRAs to evaluate and monitor the maturity 
of critical technologies. 
2This Guide refers to “technology development” as the design, development, and 
engineering of a critical technology or group of technologies, whereas “system 
development” refers to the design, engineering development, or product development of a 
system. 
Letter 
 
Preface 
=== page 7 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
This TRA guide (the Guide) is a companion to GAO’s Cost Estimating 
and Assessment Guide and the Schedule Assessment Guide.3 With the 
Guide, GAO is establishing a methodology for evaluating technology 
maturity based on best practices that can be used across the federal 
government. This is particularly salient as it relates to determining a 
program or project’s readiness to move past key decision points that 
typically coincide with major commitments of resources. Similar 
assessments can also be made by technology developers and program 
managers conducting self-assessments (referred to in this Guide as 
knowledge-building TRAs) during the course of a project to help them 
evaluate technology maturity, gauge technology development progress, 
and identify and manage risk. Existing TRA guidance in government 
agencies and industry may include similar strategies for evaluating 
technology maturity, but there is no widely held or accepted process for 
doing so. The science and technology, program management, and 
systems engineering communities each view technology readiness 
through their own lenses, which can make for variable results. In addition, 
some agencies have deemphasized the use of TRAs or questioned their 
value. We hope that this Guide can reinvigorate the use of TRAs in those 
organizations. 
The Guide is intended to provide TRA practitioners, program managers, 
technology developers, and governance bodies throughout the federal 
government a framework for better understanding technology maturity, 
and best practices for conducting high-quality assessments. 
Organizations that have developed their own guidance can use the Guide 
to support and supplement their practices. Organizations that have not 
yet developed their own policies can use it to begin establishing their own 
guidance. As a companion to GAO’s cost and schedule assessment 
guides, this Guide can also help GAO and other oversight organizations 
evaluate other agencies’ basis for their conclusions and decisions about 
technology readiness. 
We intend to keep the Guide current. We welcome comments and 
suggestions from experienced practitioners, as well as recommendations 
from experts in the science and technology, systems engineering, and 
program acquisition disciplines. 
                                                                                                                       
3GAO, Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide: Best Practices for Developing and 
Managing Capital Program Costs, GAO-09-3SP (Washington, D.C.: March 2, 2009), and 
GAO, Schedule Assessment Guide: Best Practices for Project Schedules, GAO-16-89G 
(Washington, D.C.: Dec 22, 2015). 
=== page 8 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
If you have any questions concerning the Guide, you may contact Dr. 
Timothy Persons at (202) 512-6888 or personst@gao.gov, or Michele 
Mackin at (202) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov. Contact points for 
GAO’s Office of Congressional Relations and Office of Public Affairs may 
be found on the last page of this Guide. 
 
Timothy M. Persons, Ph.D. 
Chief Scientist and Managing Director 
Science, Technology Assessment, and Analytics Team 
 
Michele Mackin 
Managing Director 
Contracting and National Security Acquisitions 
  

=== page 9 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Technology readiness assessments (TRA)—evaluations that determine a 
technology’s maturity—have been used widely at the U.S. Department of 
Defense (DOD) and National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) since the 1990s.4 This approach has also been embraced by 
other government agencies, as well as industry in aerospace, maritime, 
oil and gas, electronics, and heavy equipment that use TRAs to help 
manage their acquisitions. Relatively few agencies have guides for 
assessing a technology’s maturity and its readiness for integration into 
larger acquisition programs, and the federal government has not adopted 
a generally accepted approach for evaluating technology beyond using 
technology readiness level (TRL) measures.5 This TRA Guide is intended 
to help fill those gaps. 
The Guide has two objectives: (1) to describe generally accepted best 
practices for conducting high-quality TRAs of technology developed for 
systems or acquisition programs, and (2) to provide technology 
developers, program managers, and governance bodies with useful 
information to more effectively mature critical technologies, determine a 
technology’s readiness, and manage and address risk.6 In addition, 
oversight bodies—such as those with department or agency acquisition 
officials or government auditors—may use the Guide to evaluate whether 
the fundamental processes and best practices of effective TRAs have 
been followed and whether a TRA demonstrates the characteristics 
(credibility, objectivity, reliability, and usefulness) of a high-quality 
assessment. Appendix II lists the key questions to evaluate how well 
programs have followed the steps and best practices in this Guide. 
The Guide recognizes that TRAs have various customers within 
organizations, such as governance bodies charged with program 
oversight, as well as more narrow audiences, such as the technology 
                                                                                                                       
4DOD introduced TRAs in the 1990s. A NASA researcher pioneered the first technology 
readiness scale in 1974 with seven levels which were not formally defined until 1989. 
5TRLs are a scale of nine levels used to measure a technology’s progress, starting with 
paper studies of a basic concept and ending with a technology that has proven itself in 
actual usage in the product’s operational environment. 
6TRAs do not assess the risk associated with the technical maturity of a technology or 
system. Rather they identify specific risks (e.g., performance data gaps) associated with 
the specific technologies, which provides a basis for quantifying those risks through formal 
risk assessments. Similarly, the technology maturation plan (TMP) resulting from a TRA, 
described in the section Technology Maturation Plan, provides the basis for appropriate 
risk mitigation actions. 
Introduction 
=== page 10 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
developers, program managers, or systems engineers that use TRAs to 
determine progress in achieving technology maturity goals. The Guide 
discusses TRAs in context of the full range of best practices for 
governance, and also provides information where steps may be tailored 
for self-assessments, or knowledge-building TRAs, conducted for 
narrower audiences. 
The Guide’s chapters first introduce the concept of a TRA, its basis in 
government and commercial best practices for product and systems 
development, and the benefits a program, agency, or organization might 
expect to gain from conducting a TRA. It then maps the characteristics of 
a high-quality TRA, which include credibility, objectivity, reliability, and 
usefulness, to each of the best practices within the five TRA steps. 
Specific chapters are devoted to each of the five steps for conducting a 
TRA, followed by chapters that discuss the preparation of a technology 
maturation plan (TMP) for technologies assessed as immature, the 
current state of practice related to the assessment of software intensive 
technologies, and tools for evaluating system-level readiness, which is an 
extension of the concept of technology readiness. 
The Guide draws heavily from DOD, NASA, and the Department of 
Energy (DOE) for best practices and terminology. In addition, the Guide 
draws from resources, materials, and tools developed and applied by 
experts and organizations in order to capture the current thinking on 
technology readiness and maturity. Existing government agency guidance 
is largely geared toward conducting TRAs to support major acquisition 
decisions, in particular the decision to authorize the start of product or 
system development and allocation of substantial resources. 
Demonstrating that a program’s critical technologies (CT) have been 
proven to work in their intended operational environment before making a 
commitment to product development has also been the focus of GAO’s 
work on technology readiness since the late 1990s.7 
While this Guide focuses on how to conduct high-quality TRAs from the 
start of technology development to support technology and product 
                                                                                                                       
7Critical technologies are technology elements deemed as critical if they are new or novel, 
or used in a new or novel way, and are needed for a system to meet its operational 
performance requirements within defined cost and schedule parameters. These 
technology elements may be hardware, software, a process, or a combination thereof that 
are vital to the performance of a larger system or the fulfillment of the key objectives of an 
acquisition program. 
=== page 11 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 6 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
development decisions, the expert community recognizes that more 
frequent, regular self-assessments of the maturity of a project’s or 
program’s CTs are also best practices for technology and program 
managers. However, some experts have been concerned that applying 
the same set of practices to these more frequent assessments might be 
too time consuming and cost prohibitive and ultimately dissuade 
technology and program managers from conducting them. To that end, 
the Guide emphasizes that best practices for conducting TRAs can in 
some cases be tailored and routinely applied to meet specific program 
goals. These goals range from increasing the knowledge of program 
managers to better understanding transition risks when demonstrating 
readiness for product development. 
 
The Guide contains a number of case studies drawn from GAO reviews to 
augment the text. These case studies highlight problems typically 
associated with technology development efforts, as well as good 
practices, and emphasize the main points and lessons that the chapters 
cover. For example, GAO has found that in many programs, cost growth 
and schedule delays resulted from overly optimistic assumptions about 
maturing a technology. Experts have also found that many program 
managers and technology developers suffer from the assumption that 
they can deliver state-of-the-art technology upgrades within a constrained 
budget without available evidence that the technology will perform as 
expected in its operational environment. Appendix III includes background 
information for each program used in the case studies. 
 
The primary audiences for this Guide are the organizations and the 
program managers and technology developers who rely on and develop 
technology for acquisition programs, the governance bodies that oversee 
acquisition efforts and make important decisions about the commitment of 
organizational resources, the contractors that develop technology, and 
the audit community that evaluates these efforts. Organizations that do 
not have formal policies for conducting or reviewing TRAs will benefit 
from the Guide because it can inform them of the criteria GAO may use in 
evaluating their programs. In addition to GAO, other audit organizations 
including the Inspector General, may also use the criteria prescribed in 
the Guide for their work. We intend to periodically update the Guide. 
Comments and suggestions from experienced users, and 
recommendations from experts in the relevant fields are encouraged. 
 
The Guide’s Case Studies 
The Guide’s Readers 
=== page 12 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
To ascertain the generally accepted best practices for conducting high-
quality TRAs, we worked with practitioners and technology experts from 
across the federal government, commercial industry, nonprofits, and 
academia. We conducted periodic in-person meetings at our 
headquarters building in Washington D.C., as well as virtual meetings 
with a community of over 180 experts where we collected information, 
facilitated focus groups, and elicited feedback on iterative drafts of the 
Guide’s chapters. To ensure the Guide reflected a broad range of 
knowledge and viewpoints in order to identify useful information for 
maturing critical technologies and determine technology readiness and 
address risk, we consulted with experts from science and technology, 
systems engineering, nuclear engineering, software and computer 
sciences, risk management, and acquisition policy and program 
management disciplines. We released a public exposure draft of the GAO 
Technology Readiness Assessment Guide (GAO-16-410G) in August 
2016 for a 12-month comment period. A GAO expert panel made up of 
representatives from several mission teams adjudicated more than 400 
comments from August 2017 to June 2019. 
We conducted our work from January 2013 to December 2019 in 
accordance with all sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework that 
are relevant to our objectives. The framework requires that we plan and 
perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to 
meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work. We 
believe that the information and data obtained, and the synthesis of 
information conducted, provide a reasonable basis for the guidance in this 
product. We describe our objectives, scope and methodology in detail in 
appendix I. 
 
GAO thanks the many members of the technology readiness assessment 
community who helped make the Guide a reality. After we discussed our 
conceptual plan to embark on this effort to develop a government-wide 
TRA Guide, experts from across the federal government, commercial 
industry, nonprofits, and academia expressed interest in working with us. 
From our first kick-off meeting in January 2013 forward, their contributions 
have been invaluable. Together with these experts, GAO has developed 
a Guide that outlines the best practices and key characteristics of high-
quality TRAs and promotes their use to benefit many agencies in the 
federal government as well as other organizations in the United States 
and abroad. We would like to thank everyone who gave their time, 
attended meetings, provided valuable documentation, and responded to 
requests for comments. Those who worked with us on this Guide are 
The Guide’s Approach 
Acknowledgments 
=== page 13 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 8 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
listed in appendix VII. Additional contacts and acknowledgments are in 
appendix VIII. 
  
=== page 14 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
A TRA is a systematic, evidence-based process that evaluates the 
maturity of CTs (hardware, software, process, or a combination thereof) 
that are vital to the performance of a larger system or the fulfillment of the 
key objectives of an acquisition program.8 It is a normal outgrowth of the 
system engineering process and relies on data generated during the 
course of technology or system development. The TRA frequently uses a 
maturity scale—technology readiness levels (TRLs)—that is ordered 
according to the characteristics of the demonstration or testing 
environment under which a given technology was tested at defined points 
in time. The scale consists of nine levels, each one requiring the 
technology to be demonstrated in incrementally higher levels of fidelity in 
terms of its form, the level of integration with other parts of the system, 
and its operating environment than the previous, until the final level where 
the actual operation of the technology is in its final form and proven 
through successful mission operations. The TRA evaluates CTs at 
specific points in time for integration into a larger system. 
A TRA can be conducted and updated with regular frequency throughout 
the acquisition or project life-cycle, and there is no pre-determined 
number of TRAs or time intervals for conducting these evaluations.9 
Similarly, it is not a requirement that each TRA comprehensively consider 
all CTs. Rather, the key consideration is that each CT should be 
evaluated during development. While the TRA does not measure or 
assign a risk level to a project or assess the ability to achieve system 
cost, schedule, or performance goals, it is a fundamental means for 
evaluating an important component of risk—the maturity of a technology 
and its readiness or ability to perform as part of a larger system. The TRA 
process is a risk identification tool that will help to highlight CT maturity 
concerns. 
                                                                                                                       
8A technology element is considered a critical technology if it is new or novel, or used in a 
new or novel way, and it is needed for a system to meet its operational performance 
requirements within defined cost and schedule parameters. 
9Certain certifications and determinations are statutorily required to be made prior to a 
DOD major acquisition program’s milestone B decision. The Department of Energy (DOE), 
Office of Environmental Management, requires that TRAs and technology maturation 
plans (TMP) be conducted for major projects where new critical technologies are being 
developed prior to critical decision 2. The DOE also highly recommends these 
assessments for smaller projects, as well as operations research efforts, such as 
technology demonstrations that involve the development and implementation of new 
technologies or technologies in new operational environments. 
What is a Technology 
Readiness 
Assessment? 
=== page 15 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
GAO has found that the readiness of CTs at the start of technology 
development affects the schedule and cost of developing a product.10 
Therefore, a TRA performed before development begins provides 
important information for both the technology developer and program 
manager responsible for the daily management of developing a product 
and the governance bodies charged with the oversight of an acquisition 
program. 
 
TRLs are the most common measure for systematically communicating 
the readiness of new technologies or new applications of existing 
technologies (sometimes referred to as heritage technologies) to be 
incorporated into a system or program.11 TRLs are a compendium of 
characteristics that describe increasing levels of technical maturity based 
on demonstrated (tested) capabilities. The performance of a technology is 
compared to levels of maturity (numbered 1-9) based on demonstrations 
of increasing fidelity and complexity. Other readiness level measures, for 
example manufacturing readiness levels (MRL), have been proposed with 
varying degrees of success and use throughout the life- cycle of a 
program. 12, 13 Although not exhaustive, appendix V describes other types 
of readiness levels. 
Some organizations have tailored the TRL definitions to suit their product 
development applications. In general, TRLs are measured on a 1-9 scale, 
where level 1 generally represents paper studies of the basic concept, 
moving to laboratory demonstrations around level 4, and ending at level 
9, where the technology is tested and proven, integrated into a product, 
                                                                                                                       
10See GAO-09-3SP, GAO-12-120G, and GAO, Best Practices: Better Management of 
Technology Development Can Improve Weapon System Outcomes, GAO/NSIAD-99-162 
(Washington, D.C.: July 30, 1999). 
11Heritage technologies are technologies that have been used successfully in operation. 
These technologies may be used in new ways where the form, fit or function changed; the 
environment to which they will be exposed to in their new application is different than 
those for which they were originally qualified; or process changes have been made in their 
manufacture. 
12A scale that consists of ten levels designed to assess the maturity of a given technology, 
system, subsystem, or component from a manufacturing perspective. MRLs provide 
decision makers (at all levels) with a common understanding of the relative maturity (and 
attendant risks) associated with manufacturing technologies, products, and processes 
being considered to meet DOD requirements. 
13GAO, Best Practices: DOD Can Achieve Better Outcomes by Standardizing the Way 
Manufacturing Risks are Managed, GAO-10-439 (Washington, D.C.: Apr. 22, 2010). 
Overview of Technology 
Readiness Levels 
=== page 16 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 11 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
and successfully operated in its intended environment. Figure 1 features 
the nine TRLs and descriptions that DOD, NASA, and other organizations 
use. Appendix IV provides additional examples of government agency 
TRL definitions and descriptions, including those for both hardware and 
software. 
Figure 1: Technology Readiness Levels (TRL) 
 
  
=== page 17 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 12 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
While a TRA uses TRLs as a key measure for evaluating CTs, an 
assessment is more than just a single number at single points in time. 
TRAs are a compilation of lower-level assessments that may span 
several years, depending on the program schedule and complexity of the 
development. Assessments can help gauge the progress of a 
technology’s development, inform project plans, and identify potential 
concerns for decision makers throughout acquisitions. Conducting TRAs 
periodically and during the earlier phases of development can identify 
potential concerns before risks are carried into the later and more 
expensive stages of system development. TRAs can also facilitate 
communication between technology developers, program managers, and 
acquisition officials throughout development and at key decision points by 
providing a common language for discussing technology readiness and 
related technical risks. Finally, TRA results can inform other assessments 
and planning activities, such as cost and schedule estimates, risk 
assessments, and technology maturation plans. 
 
Acquisition programs and projects in many organizations are broadly 
divided into phases of technology development, product development, 
production, and operation activities. These phases may be further divided 
by decision points or stage gates with criteria and activities that should be 
met or completed before committing additional resources to the project. 
Passing from one decision point to the next requires evidence and 
documentation, such as test reports, data analysis, and other 
assessments to demonstrate that these criteria have been met. During 
the acquisition life-cycle, TRAs can monitor the progress of maturing 
technologies and determine how ready a technology is to make a 
transition from technology development to subsequent phases. 
In addition to TRAs, organizations use other types of assessments to 
examine the technical aspects of acquisition, such as critical design 
reviews to ensure that a system can proceed into fabrication, 
demonstration, and tests and the technology can meet the performance 
requirements within cost and schedule. Other assessments include 
systems engineering reviews used to examine the integration of 
components into systems, test reports used to detail the outcomes of 
developmental tests, and manufacturing readiness assessments used to 
examine the maturity of the processes that will be applied to manufacture 
Uses of TRAs 
Overview of the 
Acquisition Program Life-
cycle and TRAs 
=== page 18 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 13 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
the product.14 Each of these reviews provides incremental knowledge 
during the course of a program and helps managers assess how well a 
project is progressing. Taken together, the different kinds of reviews and 
assessments develop a picture of how the project is proceeding and may 
highlight risk areas. 
The Guide focuses on strategies that begin with a new or novel solution 
to a set of needs and requirements that should integrate technologies of 
varying technology readiness levels into a program or larger system. 
Therefore, acquisitions considered here have their origin in a set of 
performance requirements requiring a materiel solution. These solutions 
often require some technology development as well as requirements to 
integrate with other systems as part of the acquisition process. This 
technology development may involve new invention, technology 
maturation, or the adaptation of existing technologies or heritage 
technologies for new applications or environments.  
Figure 2 depicts a four-phased acquisition process: technology 
development, product development, production, and operations. Each 
broad phase may contain a number of activities designed to increase 
knowledge about the technologies and product being developed, built, 
and eventually operated. Each phase has a transition to the next with a 
documented evidence-based review that demonstrates the knowledge 
gained during the phase and the progress in development compared to 
goals and exit criteria established for the phase. 
  
                                                                                                                       
14For some applications, such as the development of complex chemical processing 
facilities, validation of the performance of all of the technology elements, including critical 
technologies, in an integrated system is crucial to the technology maturation process. 
Such comprehensive assessments may use a system readiness assessment (SRA) 
methodology that provides a systemic understanding of the development life-cycle of the 
entire system and its interfaces with external entities. Such assessments of the integrated 
processing system should be completed as part of key TRAs. 
=== page 19 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 2: Phased Acquisition or Project Life-Cycle with Decision Points 
 
Since each phase comprises multiple activities, the acquisition or project 
life-cycle may be further divided into “decision points” or “stage gates” 
where activities are focused on a narrower developmental task than those 
encompassed by an entire phase. For example, during the technology 
development phase, one stage may focus on exploring technologies and 
a subsequent stage may be concerned with maturing selected 
technologies. A third stage could consist of activities to help in the 
transition to mature technologies in the product development phase. A 
decision point at the end of the transition gate would signal the start of 
product development. Figure 2 is a notional illustration since each 
organization creates a model that fits the specific types of acquisition 
processes they use. 
The following descriptions highlight characteristics of each phase of the 
acquisition or project life-cycle and the potential role of TRAs within them. 
Technology development is a continuous discovery and development 
process reflecting close collaboration between the science and 
technology community, the user, and the system developer. It is iterative, 
designed to assess the viability of technologies while refining user 
requirements. In the technology development phase, the science and 
technology community explores available technologies (e.g., conceptual 
systems, components, or enabling technology areas) and matures them 
to a stage in which they may be able to integrate into a product as part of 
Technology Development 

=== page 20 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 15 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
a formal acquisition program.15 This typically occurs when the technology 
reaches at least a TRL 6 and preferably a TRL 7. 
When technology is not adequately mature to transition to product 
development, the program manager should (1) consider using an 
alternative technology that is mature and that can meet the user’s needs, 
(2) engage the user in a dialogue on appropriately modifying the 
requirements, or (3) continue to mature the selected technology. In this 
phase, regular assessments of technology progress provide confidence to 
the product developers that the technology is advancing towards 
functioning in a product within available resources of time and funding. 
Evidence-based documentation may include multiple TRAs that can 
inform analyses of alternative solutions, or baseline technology strategies, 
gauge the progress of development efforts, and establish or update 
maturation plans to increase the likelihood for successful transition of 
technology into product development.16 It is important to point out that 
agencies approach alternative technologies in different ways. For 
example, some agencies conduct an analysis of alternatives to identify 
the most mature, cost-effective technologies, using a tailored knowledge-
building TRA process to select the technology elements that will 
constitute a system.17 If there are technologies that can perform similar 
functions that are at similar TRLs, and require technology maturation and 
additional performance data, parallel technology development and testing 
is often used in the early stages to develop the data required to determine 
whether this alternative technology might achieve better outcomes. 
Product development should involve the continued reduction of 
technology risk, especially as it relates to the integration of technologies 
into a product or system design. Ideally, product development begins with 
                                                                                                                       
15Enabling technologies are products of research and development including processes, 
equipment, and methodologies that facilitate significant gains in performance or 
capabilities for a particular industry. 
16Experts recognize that knowledge-building TRAs are cost-effective and useful tools for 
informing the technology maturation process, which helps limit the more resource-
intensive formal, independent TRAs conducted for key decision points or stage gates. 
17An analytical comparison of the operational effectiveness, suitability, and life-cycle cost 
of alternatives materiel solution that satisfy an established capability need identified in an 
Initial Capabilities Document. It focuses on identification and analysis of alternatives, 
Measures of Effectiveness, schedule, Concepts of Operations, and overall risk. An 
analysis of alternatives also assesses Critical Technology Elements associated with each 
proposed materiel solution, including; technology maturity, integration risk, manufacturing 
feasibility, and technology maturation and demonstration needs. 
Product Development 
=== page 21 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 16 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
the transition of mature technologies into the project or system and ends 
when the product design is complete and developmental testing has 
shown that the various components can work together as an integrated 
whole and can be manufactured and sustained within established cost, 
schedule, and quality goals. 
Product development activities include the continued maturation of 
technologies, development and refinement of the design including the 
preparation of detailed design drawings, construction of higher fidelity 
prototypes of components and systems, integration activities to ensure 
that the components work together, testing to ensure that performance 
and reliability expectations can be met, and demonstrations of 
manufacturing capabilities to show that the product can be consistently 
produced within cost, schedule, quality, and performance goals. Product 
development may be the last phase for organizations, such as NASA who 
may build a single product where there is no production of multiple units.  
TRAs during this phase can ensure that the technologies are fully mature 
before proceeding into production. That is, the technologies have been 
demonstrated as an integrated system in an operational environment and 
are likely to meet key performance requirements.18 Upon entering product 
development and therefore having achieved at least TRL 6 (system 
demonstration in a relevant environment) the CT is now considered 
beyond the reliance of science and technology investment and is 
dependent on standard systems engineering development practices to 
achieve a fully mature status. During the product development process, 
TRAs are important inputs into systems engineering events, such as a 
project’s preliminary design review and critical design review, and can 
expose knowledge gaps. If a project has a lower than recommended TRL 
(i.e., less than TRL 7) by preliminary design review, then the project does 
not have a solid technical basis of its design and the program could put 
itself at risk of approving a design that is less likely to remain stable. 
The beginning of the production phase marks the point at which the 
elements of a product—its technologies and design—are sufficiently 
mature for initial production. Manufactured items are subjected to 
acceptance testing designed to ensure that the manufactured products 
are maintaining quality standards, before they are placed in the inventory. 
                                                                                                                       
18For some applications, extended factory acceptance testing, which can include 
integrated testing of the actual components to be placed into service, is used as part of 
the technology maturation process, and overall risk mitigation strategy. 
Production 
=== page 22 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
During this period, production processes are under statistical control and 
used to ensure the product has attained sufficient reliability and can be 
produced at an efficient rate within cost and quality goals. Depending on 
quantities to be produced, production may span 10 years or more. 
TRAs are not typically conducted during this phase. However, programs 
considering incremental upgrades of capabilities or changes to system 
designs to address issues, such as parts obsolescence, may still conduct 
TRAs. 
The operation phase marks the period of actively using the product. 
Organizations may subject the product to follow-on operational testing or 
to inspections to ensure it is performing as designed. Operational time 
periods vary, depending on the maturity of the products and their average 
useful life. The life of a product is determined by its use and by its 
materials. Buildings, such as nuclear containment facilities may have a 
30-year life. Military equipment is routinely projected to have a 15-30 year 
life-cycle. Systems designed for scientific investigation may have life-
cycles that run from 5-15 years. During the operational phase, products 
are maintained and may undergo refurbishing or receive upgrades. 
Obsolescence of technologies (that is, when it becomes too costly or 
infeasible to maintain old technology) is an important factor as is 
continued supply of the production components, including spare parts and 
replenishments. 
Similar to the production phase, TRAs may be conducted during the 
operation phase as part of efforts to upgrade system capabilities, address 
obsolescence, or plan for follow-on efforts to eventually replace the 
system. 
 
Not every organization develops or manufactures a unique product to 
meet its needs. While some organizations may develop new products and 
establish new programs, they may also undertake other work, such as 
upgrades to existing products or modifications to products developed by 
commercial vendors, adjusting the products to meet agency standards or 
needs. If the project is incrementally developing a product to fill emerging 
needs, the product may meet minimum requirements but not the desired 
end state. Successive iterations of development bring the product design 
to its full capability. 
TRAs can play an important role in informing the timing of incremental 
upgrades by providing information on whether the technologies are 
Operation 
Technology Development 
Approaches 
=== page 23 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 18 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
mature and ready to be integrated onto a product. In the case of 
incremental development or evolutionary acquisition, each product 
iteration depends on the availability of mature technologies. This may 
entail successive technology development phases. Program strategies, 
such as block upgrades, pre-planned product improvements, or similar 
efforts that provide a significant increase in operational capability, may be 
managed as separate increments.19 In an evolutionary acquisition, 
identifying and developing the technologies necessary for follow-on 
increments continues in parallel with the acquisition of preceding 
increments, allowing the mature technologies to more rapidly proceed into 
the product development phase. 
TRA data collection efforts may be incorporated as an integral part of 
systems engineering processes upfront and throughout the development 
and acquisition of a program. When planned and executed well, TRAs are 
complementary to existing program management activities, system 
development efforts, and oversight functions by governance bodies. Many 
practices needed to produce a TRA are a natural outgrowth of sound 
systems engineering practices, such as identifying CTs, creating a 
detailed systems structure, developing a plan for ensuring that CTs are 
evaluated, collecting evidence of the evaluation, and retaining the results 
as proof that these processes were undertaken as evidence of progress 
toward maturity. The program manager for the government and for the 
contractor, the internal project management and engineering teams, as 
well as technology developers, will use these documents to inform the 
management of the program and track its progress. 
Programs are also subject to periodic oversight from governance bodies 
and other decision makers who have responsibility for ensuring that 
acquisitions are progressing and are ready to move forward past key 
decision points. For these decision points, TRAs provide evidence that 
the product’s technical development is progressing as desired and that 
technologies are mature enough to move to the next phase of 
development. If program managers have conducted multiple TRAs to help 
inform their management of the technology development process, then 
they have already built a knowledge base that can provide persuasive 
evidence that the technology developers have been diligent and thorough 
in their examination of the CTs, and that the technologies themselves 
                                                                                                                       
19Incremental increases in operational capability should be developed based on mature 
technology and delivered to the user in a useful grouping. 
Relationship of TRAs to 
Program Management and 
Oversight 
=== page 24 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 19 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
have matured at a pace commensurate with the acquisition phases of the 
program. In this case, governance requirements might be met by 
validating a program’s existing body of TRA knowledge rather than by 
conducting a new assessment. 
 
The TRA process and the content of an assessment can be tailored, 
depending on the purpose and audience for which it is conducted. While 
the focus of this Guide and the best practices it describes is on how to 
conduct high-quality TRAs throughout the life-cycle, the expert community 
has recognized that tailored self-assessments are useful to help the 
narrower audience make decisions about the day-to-day management of 
technology development efforts. 
One such example of a tailored approach is through project self-
assessments or knowledge-building TRAs, as part of peer reviews. These 
knowledge-building TRAs are conducted for the program manager, 
technology developer, or systems engineer for specific purposes, such 
as: 
• learning about specific aspects of technology development (e.g., 
identifying gaps in maturity or specific areas that may be challenging); 
• calculating progress toward achieving technical performance goals for 
a specific technology or group of technologies; 
• identifying potential concerns and risks; 
• gathering evidence to continue development efforts or initiate steps 
toward using an alternative or backup technology; 
• demonstrating and maturing the performance of fieldable technologies 
or prototypes20; 
• understanding the transition risks when maturing technologies; 
• determining whether technologies are ready to transition to new or 
existing acquisition programs or larger systems; and 
                                                                                                                       
20A prototype is a physical or virtual model used to evaluate the technical or manufacturing 
feasibility or utility of a particular technology or process, concept, end item, or system. 
Prototyping is used in an acquisition program as a tool for risk reduction, technology 
maturation, identifying and resolving integration risks, controlling manufacturing and 
sustainability risks, requirements development, and minimizing risks of cost growth due to 
unknowns in design, assembly and integration. 
Ways to Tailor TRAs for 
Different Purposes 
=== page 25 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• deciding whether CTs are ready for a TRA to be conducted for 
governance bodies at an upcoming decision point. 
In cases where organizations seek to accelerate technology development 
through shorter life-cycles as a streamlined acquisition approach, the less 
resource intensive knowledge-building TRA may be the practical choice. 
However, tailoring the TRA process may not be appropriate in other 
situations. In the case of transition to product development, a decision 
maker would want to ensure that TRA best practices have been followed 
before making a major commitment of resources. 
 
Organizations have learned that more frequent, regular evaluations on 
the maturity of CTs are a best practice. During the 1990s when DOD and 
NASA were conducting TRAs, governance bodies used the TRA reports 
at major decision points to determine whether programs that depend on 
CTs were ready to move to the next acquisition phase. Organizations 
have since expanded the use of TRAs and understand that conducting 
knowledge-building TRAs in the periods between decision points can put 
technology developers, program managers, and systems engineers in a 
better position to gauge progress, monitor and manage technology 
maturity, and identify and manage risks earlier. 
 
Multiyear acquisition projects that involve the development of highly 
complex technologies and systems over long periods likely require 
multiple TRAs as part of an overall system development approach. In 
such cases, a best practice is to develop a technology maturity 
assessment strategy that involves identifying all the TRAs to be 
conducted throughout the acquisition of the system. The technology 
maturity assessment strategy lays out the broad goals and purposes of 
the TRAs, including when they may be conducted in the acquisition or 
project life-cycle, and how many, at a minimum, will be undertaken. The 
maturity assessment strategy can also include when knowledge-building 
TRAs should be conducted to serve as waypoints to gauge progress 
toward achieving specific program goals. 
The technology maturity assessment strategy should provide guidance on 
how stakeholders should achieve consensus on conducting the TRAs. 
For example, in developing an overall technology maturity assessment 
strategy, stakeholders should agree on whether one or more formal TRAs 
will be required to support one or more key decision points or stage 
More Frequent 
Evaluations of Technology 
Maturity 
Technology Maturity 
Assessment Strategies 
=== page 26 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
gates. This strategy should be included in a program’s overall acquisition 
strategy or equivalent document.  
Case study 1 shows how knowledge-building TRAs can inform acquisition 
strategies. 
Case Study 1: Knowledge-Building TRAs Inform Acquisition Strategies, cited in 
GAO-19-336SP 
In 2019, the Navy was determining the acquisition strategy for the Next Generation 
Jammer Low-Band (NGJ-LB) program and analyzing potential solutions to meet its 
capability needs. The NGJ-LB is an external jamming pod system that will be fitted on 
EA-18G Growler aircraft in order to disrupt adversaries’ use of the electromagnetic 
spectrum for radar detection, among other purposes. The Navy is planning to execute 
the program as a middle tier acquisition. A middle tier acquisition—also referred to as 
an FY16 Section 804 program—is a program that uses a streamlined acquisition 
process to rapidly prototype or field capabilities within a 5-year period. One of the 
factors program officials considered to determine whether the program would move 
forward as a middle tier acquisition was the technology maturity of critical 
technologies to be used on the program. 
The Navy used a technology maturity assessment process it cited as a best practice 
to inform the program of any technology maturity concerns prior to it making key 
decisions about its acquisition strategy. According to the Navy, in October 2018, two 
demonstration of existing technologies (DET) contracts were awarded to assess 
maturity of technologies, identify potential materiel solutions, and inform acquisition 
strategy development. Both contractors were required to provide technology 
demonstration prototypes and demonstrate technology maturity in a relevant test 
environment. In July 2019, an independent Navy assessment team conducted 
technology maturity assessments of both contractors’ prototype designs using a 
process it described as having the rigor and discipline of a TRA. We refer to these 
types of assessments as knowledge-building TRAs. The team examined contractor 
self-assessments based on technical work breakdown structures that decomposed 
the system design to its technical elements and supplemental information from the 
contractors to perform its assessments. Data from the DET contracts, as well as the 
independent assessment, confirmed the technology is available to support fielding 
the NGJ-LB capability. Based in part of the results of these assessments, the NGJ-LB 
program proposed moving forward as a middle tier acquisition program.  
GAO, Weapon Systems Annual Assessment: Limited Use of Knowledge-Based 
Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, GAO-19-336SP (Washington, 
DC.: May 7, 2019). Information from subsequent follow up work is included in this 
case study. 
 
Technology maturity assessment strategies are generally program wide 
and may encompass years of development and multiple TRAs. Every CT 
should be included, sometimes multiple times, and the strategy needs to 
=== page 27 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 22 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
allow for flexibility on how quickly the technologies mature. Often the 
customer for a technology maturity assessment strategy is the 
governance body or oversight organization of the program. For example, 
10 U.S.C. § 2366b(a)(2) requires that a Major Defense Acquisition 
Program (MDAP) may not receive a Milestone B decision until the 
Milestone Decision Authority (MDA) certifies that the technology in the 
program has been demonstrated in a relevant environment based on an 
independent review.21 The strategy should allow for sufficient time and 
resources to complete the assessment before the expected milestone 
date. 
Figure 3 is a notional program integrated schedule that shows where 
various TRAs may be conducted in relation to key decision points. Each 
program manager should determine when TRAs for governance purposes 
and for knowledge-building purposes will be conducted. The frequency of 
assessments will vary by program but should include their relation to key 
decision points; and to other systems engineering activities, such as 
technical reviews, planned contracting actions (i.e., request for proposal 
release, source selection activities, and contract awards), production 
events and deliveries, and key test activities. The number of TRAs for 
CTs varies depending on their complexity and maturity throughout 
development. For example, a complex technology entering development 
at TRL 4 may require more TRAs than a less complex CT entering 
development at TRL 6. 
                                                                                                                       
21The Milestone Decision Authority (MDA) is the acquisition executive of a Major Defense 
Acquisition Program (MDAP) responsible for ensuring that all regulatory requirements and 
acquisition procedures are in compliance with DOD Instruction 5000.02. The MDA 
assesses a program’s readiness to proceed to the next acquisition phase and determines 
if a program has met its phase exit requirements and can proceed into the next acquisition 
phase during a milestone review in terms of cost, schedule, and performance. 
=== page 28 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 23 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 3: Illustration of Technology Readiness Assessments (TRA) in a Program’s Integrated Schedule 
 
Management requirements dictate the timing of required assessments. 
For example, for DOD MDAPs a TRA is required before a Milestone B 
decision.22 However, the strategy should address the entire acquisition 
life-cycle and reflect the resources (labor, materials, and overhead, 
among others) and consider time or funding constraints for all 
assessments, whether required to support a decision point or simply to 
support the need for knowledge.  
The technology maturity assessment strategy should include guidance for 
reaching agreement with stakeholders on the TRA scope, schedule, and 
resources. Other practices dictate that the program’s master schedule 
should include the general timeframes for conducting the TRAs, and that 
the amount of time allocated for conducting the assessments be 
reasonable. Finally, the technology maturity assessment strategy should 
be aligned with other key planning documents, such as the systems 
engineering plan. 
  
                                                                                                                       
22A Milestone B is the juncture to enter the Engineering and Manufacturing Development 
(EMD) acquisition phase. It is considered the official start of an acquisition program where 
major commitments of resources are made. Statutes and DOD policy require 
documentation, such as a TRA, for Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAP). See, 
Weapon Systems Acquisition Reform Act (WSARA), Pub. L. No. 111-23, § 204, 123 Stat. 
1704, 1723-24 (May 22, 2009); DoD Instruction 5000.02, at 7, para. 5(c)(3). 

=== page 29 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 24 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Twenty years ago, GAO established that a disciplined and knowledge-
based approach in evaluating technology was fundamental in putting 
acquisition programs in a better position to succeed. In 1999, GAO 
published Best Practices: Better Management of Technology Can 
Improve Weapon System Outcomes, which reported that maturing new 
technologies before they were included in a product was perhaps the 
most important determinant of the success of the eventual product.23 In 
that report, GAO found that incorporating immature technologies into 
products increases the likelihood of cost overruns and delays in product 
development. 
Technology experts agree that when those conducting TRAs follow a 
disciplined and repeatable process, focus on how the end user plans to 
employ the technology, and rely on sufficient evidence to produce a 
useful TRA report, program managers, technology developers and 
governance bodies are in a better position to make informed decisions. 
GAO found that when program managers and technology developers 
used disciplined processes, employed a knowledge-based approach 
throughout acquisitions, and had access to readily available information 
and readiness standards, it helped them to safeguard product 
development from undue technology risks. 
High-quality TRAs provide program managers and governance bodies 
with important information for making technical and resource allocation 
decisions on whether a technology is sufficiently mature to move past a 
decision point to the next acquisition phase, needs additional work, or 
should be discontinued or reconsidered in favor of more promising 
technology. The TRA report serves as input to other program 
management decisions to estimate cost, schedule, and risk. 
Furthermore, TRAs provide a common language and framework or 
reference point to facilitate dialogue supported by well-defined measures 
and methods across organizational disciplines, departments, and 
business functions. In doing so, they serve as a basis for addressing 
transition issues, solidifying stakeholder commitments, and identifying 
potential concerns that may require closer examination in order to track 
and monitor them or to develop plans to mitigate potential risks, such as 
preparing a technology maturation plan (TMP) for immature 
                                                                                                                       
23GAO/NSIAD-99-162. 
Why TRAs are 
Important and 
Understanding their 
Features 
=== page 30 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 25 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
technologies.24 There are other supplemental methods available that rely 
on the TRA to help estimate the level of effort needed to mature the 
technology.25 
It is worth noting that commercial organizations use TRAs to gauge their 
own internal investments, such as research and development projects 
that have the potential for use on future government contracts. For 
example, Raytheon Space and Airborne Systems uses TRAs as a way to 
ensure that investments in their internal and customer funded research 
projects are advancing technology development efforts to the appropriate 
stage and at the right rate to achieve key goals or acquisition milestones. 
Raytheon believes that evaluating promising technologies and aligning 
them with DOD efforts can put them in a more competitive position. 
Raytheon developed the following tailored process to follow many of 
DOD’s steps that include: 
                                                                                                                       
24The technology maturation plan (TMP) is developed for CTs that do not meet specific 
TRL goals or expectations where gaps exist that require further evaluation, testing, or 
engineering work in order to bring the immature technology to the appropriate TRL or 
goal. As a best practice, the plan identifies the activities needed to bring immature critical 
technology up to a desired TRL. The plan is updated periodically when subsequent TRAs 
are conducted to determine technology progress or maturity, whether it has met 
expectations or goals, and whether the concerns, risks, or issues have been satisfactorily 
addressed or resolved. 
25The Advancement Degree of Difficulty (AD2) is a method that predicts what is required to 
move a technology component, subsystem, or system from one TRL to another. 
Information is provided by determining (1) the activities required to mature the technology, 
(2) the cost associated with those activities, (3) the time required to accomplish those 
activities, and (4) the likelihood that those activities cannot be accomplished. The 
information is derived from a set of questions in the five areas of design and analysis, 
manufacturing, software development, test, and operations. Not all agencies use a 
standardized AD2 process. Some agencies rely on development of the TMP to identify 
developmental tasks and quantify the resources related to maturing a critical technology 
from its current TRL to the target TRL. Another method, the Research and Development 
Degree of Difficulty (R&D3), is a 5-level scale intended to supplement the TRL by 
characterizing the degree of difficulty in proceeding from the current TRL state to desired 
level, with 5 being very difficult and 1 being least difficult to mature the technology 
(Mankins 2002).The Risk Identification, Integration, and Ilities (RI3) method is an 
integrated method involving both top-level (key processes) and lower-level (trigger 
questions) approaches for identifying technology risks. It is intended to support program 
managers and system engineers in the development and integration of new and reused 
technologies by identifying the technical risks that historically have hampered previous 
programs. When used as an integral part of an integrated systems engineering strategy, 
this approach can be done early to enable evidence-based decisions and mitigate the 
potential for cost overruns and schedule delays. 
=== page 31 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 26 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• Identifying potential systems and programs as likely recipients of the 
technology 
• Using the research team to perform the TRA, supplemented when 
necessary by internal technology readiness experts, 
• Reviewing assessments by subject matter experts in both technology 
development and readiness, and business leaders to ensure both 
accuracy of the assessment and adequate progression of the 
technology, 
• Relying on mechanisms to change the research plan to accelerate, 
slow down, or retire the development based upon the technical 
readiness assessment, 
• Ensuring objectivity in the assessment—particularly with regard to 
demonstration environments—necessitated by system requirement 
evolution. 
TRAs have also expanded their reach within the federal government for 
research and development projects. In September 2017, the Department 
of Transportation’s Federal Highway Administration issued a guidebook 
that provides the necessary information for TRL assessments, as a tool 
for determining the maturity of technologies and identifying next steps in 
the research process.26 The department developed the guidebook 
because it needed a way to identify which research projects to emphasize 
for transition and which audiences would be interested in the results. See 
appendix IV where the Department of Transportation TRL descriptions 
and questions can be found. 
TRLs have proven to be reliable indicators of the relative maturity of the 
technologies reviewed in government and commercial acquisitions, and 
their eventual success after they were included in product development 
programs. As discussed in a prior GAO report, DOD and commercial 
technology development case studies showed that demonstrating a high-
level of maturity before allowing new technologies into product 
development programs put those programs in a better position to 
succeed.27 Simply put, the more mature technology is at the start of the 
program, the more likely the program will succeed in meeting its 
                                                                                                                       
26U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, Technology 
Readiness Level Guidebook (Report No. FHWA-HRT-17-047). (Washington, D.C.; Sept. 
2017). 
27GAO/NSIAD-99-162. 
=== page 32 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 27 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
objectives. Technologies that were included in product development 
before they were mature later contributed to cost increases and schedule 
delays (see table 1). 
Table 1: Cost and Schedule Experiences for Products with Mature and Immature 
Technologies 
Product development 
Product development and 
associated technologies 
TRL at 
program 
initiation 
Cost growth Schedule delay 
Comanche helicopter 
• Engine 
• Rotor 
• Forward looking infrared 
• Helmet mounted display 
• Integrated avionics 
 
5 
5 
3 
3 
3 
101 percenta 120 percenta 
Brilliant anti-armor submunition 
• Acoustic sensor 
• Infrared seeker 
• Warhead 
• Inertial measurement unit 
• Data processors 
 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
88 percent 62 percent 
Hughes HS-702 satellite 
• Solar cell array 
 
6 
None None 
Ford Jaguar automobile 
• Adaptive cruise control 
• Voice activated controls 
 
8 
8 
None None 
Source: GAO/NSIAD-99-162. | GAO 20 48G. 
aThe Comanche helicopter, in particular, has experienced a great deal of cost growth and schedule 
slippage for many reasons, of which technology immaturity is only one. Other factors, such as 
changing the scope, funding, and pace of the program for affordability reasons, have also contributed. 
 
In developing this Guide, experts agreed that conducting TRAs provides 
many tangible benefits in addition to an evaluation of the maturity of CTs 
at a given time. For example, TRAs may be used to protect program 
managers from unknowingly accepting or being coerced to accept 
immature technologies into their programs and projects. Executing the 
TRA process also includes a multitude of activities that require 
practitioners to cross organizational, professional, and managerial 
boundaries to establish lines of communication, exchange information, 
and keep scientists, systems engineers, acquisition officials, and others 
informed throughout the development of a program or project. These 
TRAs Help Inform 
Important Acquisition 
Functions 
=== page 33 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 28 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
activities increase knowledge and facilitate an understanding of how 
technologies interact with one another and with the larger systems or 
programs that integrate them. They may increase awareness of changes 
that could affect other elements and systems, while eliciting involvement 
and participation of the test and evaluation communities to ensure that 
maturity demonstrations adequately stress technologies appropriate to 
the expected relevant or operational environment. 
Programs that forgo TRAs or ignore the information they provide risk 
negative consequences in terms of cost increases, schedule delays, or 
delivering less capability than promised. The TRA process is one 
approach that identifies potential risks during early technology 
development before they are carried past a decision point and into 
product development, where resource requirements are often substantial. 
Case study 2 shows the negative consequences of accepting immature 
technologies at program initiation when CTs should have been mature. 
Case Study 2: Immature Technologies Increase Risk, an Example from DOD, 
cited in GAO-08-408 
Before its cancellation in 2011, the Future Combat Systems—composed from 14 
weapon systems and an advanced information network—was the centerpiece of the 
Army’s effort to transition to a lighter, more agile, and more capable combat force. In 
March 2008, GAO reported that 42 out of the program’s 44 critical technologies had 
not reached maturity halfway through its development schedule and budget at five 
years and $12 billion in spending. Major technical challenges, the Army’s acquisition 
strategy, and the cost of the program, as well as insufficient oversight and review, all 
contributed to its subsequent cancellation. 
GAO, Defense Acquisitions: 2009 Is a Critical Juncture for the Army’s Future Combat 
System, GAO-08-408 (Washington, D.C.: March 7, 2008). 
 
 
 
 
=== page 34 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 29 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Case study 3 shows how the absence of key information about the 
maturity of CTs can hinder important decisions. 
Case Study 3: Assessments Provide Key Information, an Example from DOE, 
cited in GAO-10-675 
In June 2010, GAO reported that the Department of Energy (DOE) was unable to 
provide information to policymakers on the progress of two key technologies to 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Essentially, DOE did not systematically assess the 
maturity or use a standard set of benchmarks or terms to report on the maturity of 
technologies. When policymakers were determining climate change policies, these 
shortcomings limited their oversight in DOE’s spending to develop these technologies 
such as determining future resource needs to commercially deploy these 
technologies. GAO recommended that DOE develop a set of standard benchmarks to 
measure and report to Congress on the maturity of the two key technologies to 
address information gaps and technology development issues. 
GAO, Coal Power Plants: Opportunities Exist for DOE to Provide Better Information 
on the Maturity of Key Technologies to Reduce Carbon Dioxide Emission, 
GAO-10-675 (Washington, D.C.: June 16, 2010). 
 
 
TRAs provide valuable information that can help program managers, 
technology developers, and governance bodies make informed decisions, 
but it is important to understand the features that can affect their quality, 
as well as their limitations. Understanding these features can help both 
the practitioners who apply the best practices and the decision makers 
who depend on the TRA report information to better understand context in 
terms of what is being assessed, and what the information does and does 
not convey. For example, TRAs are point-in-time evaluations that provide 
a snap shot in time. While there is no standard guideline for the shelf life 
of a TRA rating, experts assert that it can range anywhere from 1 to 6 
months, depending on the type of technology and how rapidly it evolves.  
The quality of a TRA depends on close communication among all the 
stakeholders, including the technology developer, program manager, 
governance body, and TRA team that performs the assessment. 
Organizational communities that create, develop, manage, produce, and 
integrate technology are diverse and each has their own set of objectives, 
goals, and missions. Differences between them can lead to different 
perspectives in planning and conducting TRAs and interpreting the 
results. The terms used and what they mean often differ. For example, 
Understanding Features of 
TRAs Can Help 
Practitioners and 
Consumers of Information 
=== page 35 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
terms like “simulated environment,” “relevant environment,” and 
“operational environment” often have different meanings for different 
organizations and disciplines.  
Optimism, which is pervasive in acquisition programs, can also affect 
TRA report findings or their interpretation. For example, program 
managers may believe that lessons learned from past programs will 
benefit their program and may not closely scrutinize the maturity of 
certain technologies. Or, they may be more willing to take on greater risk 
and accept immature technology because their promised performance is 
vital to obtaining funding and stakeholder buy-in. In addition, in today’s 
competitive environment, contractor program managers may be overly 
optimistic about the maturity of CTs, especially prior to contract award. 
Case study 4 highlights that underestimating the cost to mature CTs can 
negatively affect program development and schedule. 
Case Study 4: Space Programs Often Underestimate Costs, an Example from 
DOD, cited in GAO-07-96 
Costs for DOD space acquisitions have been consistently underestimated over the 
past several decades—sometimes by billions of dollars. In 2006, GAO reported that 
cost growth in DOD space programs was largely caused by initiating programs before 
determining whether requirements were achievable within available resources. 
Unrealistic cost estimates resulted in shifting funds to and from programs, which also 
exacerbated agencywide space acquisition problems. For example, on the National 
Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System program, DOD and the 
Department of Commerce committed to the development and production of satellites 
before the technology was mature—only 1 of 14 critical technologies was mature at 
program initiation, and 1 technology was found to be less mature after the contractor 
conducted more verification testing. The combination of optimistic cost estimates with 
immature technology resulted in cost increases and schedule delays. GAO 
recommended that DOD, among other things, require officials to document and justify 
the differences between program cost estimates and independent cost estimates. 
GAO also recommended that, to better ensure investment decisions for space 
programs, estimates could be updated as major events occur within a program that 
might have a material impact on cost, such as budget reductions, integration 
problems, and hardware and software quality problems. 
GAO, Space Acquisitions: DOD Needs to Take More Action to Address Unrealistic 
Initial Cost Estimates of Space Systems, GAO-07-96 (Washington, D.C.: Nov. 17, 
2006). 
 
The quality of a TRA is also contingent on the accuracy and relevance of 
the artifacts, test data, analytical reports, and other information used to 
=== page 36 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 31 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
support the assessment. The artifacts, data, and other information 
collected to assess CTs may have dependency, functions, and interaction 
with other systems or program elements that may be outside the 
assessment scope or may not be available to the TRA team conducting 
the assessment. Thus, careful consideration of technology components, 
systems, or subsystems that may be out of the scope’s evaluation should 
be carefully and selectively considered as part of the TRA design and 
execution.  
Further, changes or refinements in requirements, technology designs, or 
other factors can and often do change which can affect the evaluation. 
These changes could impact both the information needed to conduct a 
TRA and the interpretation of previously collected information. For 
example, at the earliest stages of development, a technology program 
may not necessarily have a discreet set of defined requirements and may 
have more than one potential application or system it is being developed 
for, so it may be infeasible to assess it for all possible applications. 
However, information about the system and operational environment that 
the technology will operate within is necessary to conduct TRAs that will 
assess the maturity of technologies beyond the lowest levels of the TRL 
scale. 
By regularly documenting data, analyses, and facts, and keeping abreast 
of changes in requirements, technology developers and program 
managers are in a better position to facilitate and support TRA efforts. 
Such information, when collected periodically and retained for future 
reference, can also improve the program management and technology 
development process. 
  
=== page 37 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 32 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
In this section, we introduce the characteristics of a high-quality TRA, the 
best practices associated with those characteristics, and an established, 
repeatable process that governs the execution of the best practices. We 
describe how the process steps, if implemented, can result in a TRA that 
reflects four distinct characteristics of a high-quality assessment. Finally, 
we describe how the Guide displays this information by presenting each 
step as its own chapter with the associated processes and best practices. 
 
GAO’s research and discussions with experts from government, industry, 
non-profits, and academia has found that high-quality TRAs are credible, 
objective, reliable, and useful. Decision makers—from the technology 
developer or program manager who sponsors the TRA to the governance 
body who uses the TRA report to make important resource decisions at a 
milestone or stage gate—can depend on the information when the report 
reflect these four characteristics. 
• Credible TRAs are conducted with an understanding of the 
requirements that guide development of the CTs and system, the 
relevant or operational environment in which it will function, and its 
integration or interaction with other technologies. 
• Objective TRAs are based on objective, relevant, and trustworthy 
data, analysis, and information; and the judgements, decisions, and 
actions for planning and executing the assessment are free from 
internal and external bias or influence. 
• Reliable TRAs follow a disciplined process that facilitates 
repeatability, consistency, and regularity in planning, executing, and 
reporting the assessment. 
• Useful TRAs provide information that has sufficient detail and is timely 
and can be acted upon. 
 
A number of best practices form the basis of a high-quality TRA. Our 
research shows that credible, objective, reliable and useful TRAs are 
conducted by government agencies and industry that systematically 
implements these best practices. The following list describes the best 
practices that, if implemented, can result in a TRA that exhibits the four 
characteristics. 
 
 
The Characteristics of 
a High-Quality TRA 
and a Reliable 
Process for 
Conducting Them 
Four Characteristics of a 
High-Quality TRA 
Best Practices Related to 
Planning, Executing, 
Reporting, and Using the 
TRA 
=== page 38 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 33 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
A credible TRA 
• is comprehensive and includes all of the key information identified in 
the TRA plan 
• identifies and has the expertise needed to conduct the assessment 
• considers the newness or novelty of technologies and how they plan 
to be used as basis for selecting CTs 
• considers the operational performance environment and potential cost 
and schedule drivers as a basis for selecting CTs 
• considers the relevant environment as a basis for selecting CTs 
• considers the potential adverse interaction with other systems as 
basis for selecting CTs 
• selects CTs during early development 
• selects CTs at a testable level 
 
An objective TRA 
• is conducted by an independent and objective TRA team 
• is based on a level of detail that is consistent with the level of detail 
(evidence) available 
• includes all of the key information (evidence) obtained by the TRA 
team to conduct the assessment 
• is based on solid analysis to determine the number of CTs 
• confirms the CTs based on more specific questions and requirements 
• is based on test articles and results that have been verified by the 
TRA team 
• assigns TRL ratings based on credible and verified evidence 
• is verified by management with respect to the factual accuracy of the 
TRA report 
 
A reliable TRA 
• follows a reliable, disciplined, and repeatable process to select CTs 
• is reviewed by the TRA team to ensure the initial TRA plan has all the 
essential information 
=== page 39 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 34 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• has adequate time and resources to conduct the assessment 
• documents the rationale used to select CTs, including technologies 
not selected 
• confirms the TRL definitions are still appropriate, and agreement is 
reached between the TRA team and the program manager on the 
kinds of evidence needed to demonstrate that a goal or objective has 
been met 
• has a documented TRA policy or guidance for preparing a report 
• includes all the key information in the TRA report 
• includes management’s written response to the TRL rating in the TRA 
report including dissenting views 
• documents lessons learned in the TRA report 
 
A useful TRA report 
• identifies the recipient or recipients of the TRA report 
• is used for its stated purpose, such as to inform decision makers 
about whether a prescribed TRL goal has been met, or identify 
potential areas of concern or risk, among other purposes. 
• identifies the actions to take for CTs assessed as immature, such as 
considering an alternate or backup technology, developing a 
technology maturation plan, updating the program risk management 
plan, or updating the cost and schedule risk assessments 
• is submitted in advance of a decision point or stage gate for 
governance reviews 
 
This Guide presents a five step process that provides the framework for 
planning, assessing, and reporting the TRA. The process represents a 
consistent methodology based on government and industry best practices 
that can be used across organizations to assess the maturity of CTs. By 
following a process of repeatable steps, organizations should be able to 
produce high-quality TRA reports that can be clearly traced, replicated, 
and updated to inform decision makers who use the information. Each of 
the five steps is important for ensuring that TRAs provide decision makers 
with high-quality information for making important decisions. Figure 4 
shows the five steps for conducting a TRA. The subsequent chapters in 
this Guide have a chapter on each step that describes the process in 
more detail, and the corresponding best practices for executing them. 
The Five Step TRA 
Process 
=== page 40 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 35 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 4: Five Steps for Conducting a High-Quality Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) 
 
 
The best practices described in this Guide are mapped to the 
corresponding steps as part of an overall process for conducting a TRA. 
When the steps and best practices are followed these efforts can produce 
a high-quality TRA report. Table 2 shows the five steps for conducting a 
TRA, the corresponding best practices and associated high-quality 
characteristics.  
Table 2: Five Steps for Conducting a Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) and Associated Best Practices and 
Characteristics 
Step Best practices (Characteristics) 
1: Prepare the TRA plan and Identify 
the TRA team 
The TRA plan has a comprehensive assessment approach and includes all the key 
information. (Credible) 
The TRA plan identifies the recipient or recipients of the TRA report. (Useful) 
The TRA plan identifies the expertise needed to conduct the assessment, and other 
characteristics of the TRA team. (Credible) 
The TRA team members are independent and objective. (Objective) 
The TRA team reviews the initial TRA plan to ensure it has all the essential information. 
(Reliable) 
The TRA team has the time and resources to execute the plan. (Reliable) 
The TRA team obtains all the key information to conduct the assessment, such as the 
program master schedule, budget documents, test plans, and technical baseline description 
of the program’s purpose, system, performance characteristics, and system configuration. 
(Objective) 
 The level of detail for the TRA is consistent with the level of detail (evidence) available for the 
program. (Objective) 
2: Identify the Critical Technologies CTs are selected through a reliable, disciplined, and repeatable process. (Reliable) 
CTs are selected based on consideration of the newness or novelty of technologies and how 
they will be used (Credible) 
The TRA Process and 
Corresponding Best 
Practices and Key 
Characteristics 
=== page 41 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 36 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Step Best practices (Characteristics) 
CTs are selected based on consideration of the operational performance requirements and 
potential cost and schedule drivers. (Credible) 
A relevant environment is derived for each CT from those aspects of the operational 
environment determined to be a risk for the successful operation of that technology. 
(Credible) 
The potential adverse interaction with other systems which the technology being developed 
should interface is considered as part of the determination to select CTs. (Credible) 
The number of CTs selected for the assessment is not arbitrary and is based on solid 
analysis using the work breakdown structure (WBS), technical baseline description, process 
flow diagram, or other key program documents. (Objective) 
The selection of CTs is confirmed, using more specific questions and requirements that 
pertain to the platform, program, or system in which they will operate, is confirmed by the 
TRA team and others, as appropriate. (Objective) 
CTs are selected during early development. (Credible) 
CTs are defined at a testable level, including any software needed to demonstrate their 
functionality. (Credible) 
The TRA team documents the reasons why technologies are selected as critical, including 
reasons why other technologies are not selected as critical. (Reliable) 
3: Evaluate Critical Technologies The TRA team confirms the TRL measure and definitions selected in step 1 are appropriate, 
and reaches agreement with the program manager on the kinds of evidence needed to 
demonstrate that a TRA goal or objective has been met. (Reliable) 
The TRA team verifies that the test article and the relevant or operational environment used 
for testing are acceptable and the results are sufficient. (Objective) 
The TRA team assigns a TRL rating for each CT based on credible and verified evidence, 
such as test and analytical reports, requirements documents, schematics, and other key 
documents. (Objective) 
4: Prepare the TRA Report Policy or guidance details how TRA reports should be prepared, including a template that 
identifies the elements to report; process for submission, review and approval; how the TRA 
report results should be communicated; and who should be involved. (Reliable) 
The TRA report includes all of the key information. (Reliable) 
Management checks the factual accuracy of the TRA report. (Objective) 
The TRA report includes management’s written response to the TRL rating. (Reliable) 
5: Use the TRA Report Findings The TRA report is used for its stated purpose, such as to inform decision makers about 
whether a prescribed TRL goal has been met, or identify potential areas of concern or risk. 
(Useful) 
For CTs assessed as immature, one of several actions is identified, such as the consideration 
of alternative technology, development of a technology maturation plan, updates to the 
program’s risk management plan, and revision of the cost or schedule risk assessments 
(Useful) 
TRA reports used for governance purposes are submitted in advance of a decision point or 
stage gate. (Useful)  
The TRA report documents lessons learned. (Reliable) 
Source: GAO analysis and subject matter expert input. | GAO-20-48G. 
 
=== page 42 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 37 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The five steps for conducting high-quality TRAs can be tailored to meet 
specific goals. For example, in the case of a knowledge-building TRA 
conducted as a project self-assessment, a subset of practices from Steps 
3 and 5 might be the most relevant. Each chapter will lay out when such 
tailoring may be appropriate. In the case of transition to full-scale product 
development, a decision maker in an organization would want to ensure 
that the entire range of best practices is followed to evaluate technology 
readiness before making a major commitment of resources. 
  
=== page 43 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 38 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
 
 
 
The program manager or technology developer develops the initial TRA 
plan. The TRA plan should clearly define the purpose and scope, goal of 
the assessment, resources to be provided to support the assessment, 
such as the funding and time to conduct the assessment, how dissenting 
views will be handled, and for whom the TRA is being conducted. In 
addition, the TRA plan should describe the system, specify the CT 
definition and TRL definitions to use, identify potential CTs to evaluate, 
and identify the expertise needed to select the TRA team members, along 
with any agreements, such as statements of independence.28 The level of 
detail in the TRA plan needs to be consistent with the level of detail 
(evidence) available about the program. 
The TRA should be conducted by a team of knowledgeable individuals 
who are experienced in assessing technology maturity and their 
qualifications, certifications, and training should be documented. These 
team members are often outside the program office, have expertise with 
                                                                                                                       
28Although the definition of a CT may vary slightly from organization to organization, 
technology elements are generally considered critical if they are new or novel, or used in a 
new or novel way, and are needed for a system to meet its operational performance 
requirements within defined cost and schedule parameters. These definitions should be 
included in an organization’s policy or guidance, and identified in the TRA plan as a key 
reference for the program manager and TRA team. Similarly, organizations should choose 
the set of TRL definitions that best suit their needs or application.  
Step 1 – Prepare the 
TRA Plan and Select 
the TRA Team 
=== page 44 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 39 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
the technologies to be evaluated, and bring objectivity and independence 
to the activities. 
Preparing the TRA plan is a twofold process. First, the program manager 
or technology developer prepares the initial TRA plan to guide the 
process for conducting the assessment by an independent and objective 
TRA team. Key information is collected and added to supplement the 
TRA plan, such as the program master schedule, budget documents, test 
plans, and a technical baseline description that describes the program’s 
purpose, system, performance characteristics, and system 
configuration.29 Second, once the initial plan is drafted and TRA team 
members are selected, the plan is reviewed by the TRA team to ensure 
the plan has all the essential information. At this point, the TRA team and 
the program manager or technology developer may discuss the plan and 
information to ensure that the assessment approach is sound and 
understood. 
Parts of the TRA plan may be revised, such as the scope, schedule 
needed to conduct the assessment, funding to support the effort, or 
increasing personnel to conduct the assessment. 
 
As the TRA team refines the plan, a sufficient level of detail for the 
assessment should be consistent with the level of detail (evidence) 
available for the expected level of maturity of the CT at that point in the 
program. For example, information for technology assessed in the earlier 
stages of development would not have the same level of detailed 
information than a technology at a more mature phase of development. 
The TRA should obtain all of the key information (evidence) needed to 
conduct the assessment to ensure it is objective. The information may 
include the program master schedule, budget documents, test plans, and 
technical base description of a program’s purpose, system, performance 
characteristics, and system configuration. 
The purpose of a TRA plan falls into one of two categories: 
1. a comprehensive assessment of the CTs needed for a decision point 
or stage gate review for a governance body as evidence of 
                                                                                                                       
29It is important to evaluate the technical baseline description for adequacy at the earliest 
phases of planning. Planning documents should have sufficient detail to support 
identifying the CTs. 
Purpose and Scope of a 
TRA Plan 
=== page 45 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 40 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
demonstrating that a prescribed maturity or criteria for decision 
making purposes, such as whether to commit resources and approve 
a program to move to the next phase of development, or 
2. a knowledge-building TRA to evaluate the maturity of a certain CT or 
group of CTs to assess their progress during development. 
TRAs conducted as comprehensive assessments would apply the full 
range of best practices outlined in this Guide. In the case of a knowledge-
building TRA conducted for a narrower audience—the program manager, 
technology developer, or systems engineer—and where more frequent 
and informal assessments may be conducted, the purpose can vary, 
including 
• learning about specific aspects of technology development (that is, 
identifying gaps in maturity or areas that may be challenging), 
• calculating progress toward achieving a technical performance goal 
for a specific technology or group of technologies, 
• identifying potential concerns and risks, 
• gathering evidence to continue development efforts or initiate steps 
toward using an alternative or backup technology, 
• demonstrating and maturing the performance of fieldable technologies 
or prototypes, 
• understanding the transition risks when maturing technologies, 
• determining whether technologies are ready to transition to new or 
existing acquisition programs or larger systems, or 
• deciding whether CTs are ready for a comprehensive TRA to be 
conducted for governance bodies at an upcoming decision point. 
The TRA plan should first identify who the customer is and what the 
needs are for that particular assessment. For example, is the program 
manager or systems engineer the recipient of the TRA that calculates 
progress in achieving technical maturity goals for a specific technology or 
group of technologies? Or is the TRA to be prepared as a formal 
assessment for an upcoming decision point or stage gate for a go/no go 
decision? In the case of the initial assessment used to begin program 
development, a broad range of technologies may need to be assessed. In 
the case of interim assessments, the scope may be more limited 
Once the scope of the TRA has been determined, the TRA team should 
create a detailed schedule that includes waypoints on when key decisions 
will be made and provides margins for inevitable (but often unforeseen) 
=== page 46 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 41 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
delays. It should include a realistic estimate of the time and resources 
needed to execute the TRA plan considering the number of and rationale 
for the CTs selected and a realistic schedule for conducting the 
assessment. In particular, the team should ensure that the TRA schedule 
is not overly optimistic or based on estimates constructed to meet a 
particular date. In other words, the time allocated to the assessment 
should be based on the effort required to complete the activity, the 
resources available, and resource efficiency. Compressing the schedule 
to meet a particular date is acceptable as long as additional resources are 
available to complete the effort that fewer team members would have 
completed in more time. If additional resources are not available, and the 
completion date of the TRA cannot be delayed, then the assessment 
scope will have to be reduced and discussed with stakeholders and 
documented. 
Essentially, the team should try to ensure that the schedule realistically 
reflects the resources that are needed to do the work and should 
determine whether all required resources will be available when they are 
needed.30 If resources are not available, the team should disclose that the 
compressed schedule curtails the depth of analysis and may jeopardize 
the evaluation. 
The customers for the TRA plan can include several organizations, such 
as the governance or oversight body, but the plan may also be created for 
a more narrow audience—the program manager, systems engineer, 
technology developer, or independent consultant, to name a few. Some 
questions the TRA plan may address are 
• What CT definition will be used as criteria to determine which 
technology elements are critical and how will they be selected? 
• What set of TRL definitions will be used as criteria to conduct the 
TRA? 
• What evaluation criteria will be used to judge the results of a given 
test? 
• How much evidence will be needed to support a given assessment? 
• What evaluation points will be needed to support the assessment? 
                                                                                                                       
30GAO, GAO Schedule Assessment Guide, GAO-12-120G (Washington, D.C.: May 30, 
2012). 
=== page 47 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 42 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• What kinds of evidence will be collected? 
• Who will lead the TRA team? 
• How will dissenting opinions on the results of the TRA report be 
handled? 
• Will statements of independence be used for members of the TRA 
team? 
• How should the credentials and experience of team members be 
documented? 
• What documentation will be needed for each CT? 
• Who will write the TRA report that summarizes the assessment 
results? 
• How will the team communicate with the program? 
The scope should also include measures that the team has agreed upon 
to describe or quantify results of the TRA. For example, the TRA plan 
should identify the CT definition that will be used as a basis for selecting 
critical technology elements. In addition, the TRA plan should include the 
specific set of TRL definitions to describe the criteria for evaluating each 
CT. In addition, the TRA team should reach consensus on the tools they 
will use to conduct the TRA, such as checklists or automated checklists or 
spreadsheet calculators.31 Importantly, the TRA team should agree on the 
specific standards to determine the sufficiency of evidence. For example, 
is direct observation of current testing by the subject matter experts 
required, or will written observations of current and past testing be used? 
How many tests or observations are needed to support a given 
assessment? How will success be measured? How will disagreements 
among the experts be documented in the final report? 
Review of past TRAs conducted on heritage technologies can inform and 
strengthen current TRA planning efforts, particularly if those same 
technologies are being used in new ways where the form, fit or function 
may be different; or in different operational environments. In such cases, 
it is a good practice to include information about the heritage technology’s 
                                                                                                                       
31In some cases, agencies have developed a set of standardized TRL calculators. 
However, these are guides and at times tailored TRL calculators are more appropriate for 
a specific application. In these instances, the modified TRL calculators should be reviewed 
and approved by the TRA team and the appropriate program or project management 
officials. 
=== page 48 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 43 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
prior mission and purpose, and design changes that have occurred since 
it was originally developed, among other information. 
When scoping the TRA, it is important to note that a one size fits all 
approach is not realistic. Hardware and software technology frequently 
vary in complexity and size, thereby making each effort to scope the TRA 
unique. Each technology may be distinctive and the TRA plan should be 
tailored to reflect these technological differences. 
 
An independent TRA team consists of subject matter experts from a 
variety of disciplines who will identify or affirm the selection of CTs, 
evaluate the maturity of those CTs, and assign the TRL rating for each 
CT assessed. The TRA team, usually recruited by the program manager 
or other decision making authorities, is also responsible for planning, 
executing, and documenting the TRA. In this regard, the TRA team 
should have access to program and contractor personnel, and the data 
and information to conduct the assessment. The TRA team should 
participate in a pre-assessment orientation that includes a technical 
overview of the program and the technologies to be evaluated. 
The planning documents and the TRA plan should provide information on 
the makeup of the team, including biographies detailing the credentials of 
each member along with information about their experience, 
qualifications, certifications, and training. In particular, the information 
should allow someone relying on the assessment to observe that the 
team can be objective in its evaluation, is independent of the program, 
and understand how the individual TRA team members were selected. 
The number of individuals appointed to the TRA team depends on the 
purpose of the assessment, the requirements imposed by a governance 
or oversight body, and the breadth of subject matter knowledge needed 
for the assessment. Generally, a TRA team of three to five subject matter 
experts from fields relevant to the technologies to be assessed, all with 
experience and training in evaluating technology maturity, is 
recommended. 
For comprehensive TRAs conducted in preparation for a decision point, 
the governance or oversight body often requires that members of the TRA 
team be subject matter experts who are independent of the program to 
avoid conscious or subconscious bias, or the perception thereof. That 
said, much of the value of the process is in the detailed discussion that 
leads to assignment of a TRL rating, and including program office team 
Selection of the TRA Team 
=== page 49 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 44 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
members as observers can be valuable. For knowledge-building TRAs 
conducted for program managers or technology developers, project team 
members may be a more practical choice to conduct the assessment. 
However, maintaining objectivity when evaluating the evidence is a key 
requirement that should be observed by all members of the TRA team. 
In the selection of the TRA team, it is important to 
• Ensure that TRA leads, subject matter experts, and practitioners have 
the relevant experience, knowledge, and training to perform in their 
designated roles. 
• Select enough team members for adequate coverage of technologies. 
For example if a technology involves operations in space, a team 
member with appropriate experience in testing such technologies 
would be needed. The team size will also depend on how many 
technologies need to be evaluated. For example, if a TRA involves a 
large number of CTs from multiple technological fields, the team will 
generally be larger than if there are only a few CTs from related fields. 
• For a successful independent assessment, technical experts should 
be selected from outside the program. Typically, an independent TRA 
team is convened and bases its evaluation of the CT on primary 
source documentation provided by the program manager. 
Independent TRA team members may be selected from 
• laboratories or other research entities independent of the project, 
• federally funded research and development centers, 
• subject matter experts within the agency or academic institutions, 
but not the program, or 
• retired personnel. 
The TRA team should have access to additional subject matter experts 
once the assessment is underway because it not uncommon for teams to 
discover that they have limited knowledge or depth of experience in 
certain areas. In this regard, the TRA team should discuss this possibility 
with the program manager or responsible party so that they can plan 
accordingly. 
The availability of TRA team members with the necessary expertise may 
be limited or in short supply in some organizations, disciplines, or 
industries due to limited availability of subject matter experts, cost 
considerations, or other factors. In these circumstances, it may be 
impracticable to select members who are entirely independent of the 
=== page 50 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 45 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
program, and it may be necessary to establish a review board that can 
independently and objectively review the TRA team’s approach, the 
findings and conclusions reached, or any disagreements among parties. 
The review board can serve as the independent governance body in the 
TRA process to ensure that the assessment exhibits all of the high-quality 
characteristics. For example, if the independent review board does not 
agree with the TRA report’s findings or if agreement cannot be reached 
between the program manager and the TRA team, arbitration can be 
documented and, along with the evidence on both sides of the 
disagreement, presented to the governance body. 
A best practices checklist that includes the corresponding high-quality 
characteristics related to developing the TRA plan and selecting the TRA 
team is included below. 
• The TRA plan includes a comprehensive assessment approach with 
the following key information: (Credible) 
• A clearly defined purpose and scope; 
• The resources, schedule, funding, and personnel; 
• The CT definition and TRL definitions for selecting and assessing 
critical technologies; 
• Evaluation criteria for assessing the test results, the types of 
evidence needed to perform the assessment, and the person 
responsible for writing TRA report; 
• A written study plan to help each TRA team member prepare for 
conducting the assessment; and, 
• A plan for handling dissenting views. 
• The TRA plan identifies the recipient or recipients of the TRA report, 
such as the technology developer, program manager, systems 
engineer, or governance body. (Useful) 
• The TRA plan identifies the expertise needed to conduct the 
assessment, and other characteristics of the TRA team. These 
include: (Credible) 
• Composition of the expertise, knowledge, and experience needed 
to conduct the TRA is clearly written to guide the selection of TRA 
team members; 
• Size of the TRA team is defined and is adequate to conduct the 
assessment; 
Best Practices Checklist: 
Develop the TRA Plan and 
Select the TRA Team 
=== page 51 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 46 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• TRA team members have the requisite experience, qualifications, 
certifications, and training; and 
• TRA team member profiles are documented and include signed 
statements of independence 
• TRA team has access to additional subject matter experts from a 
variety of disciplines, as needed and determined by the team. 
• TRA team members are independent and objective. (Objective) 
• TRA team reviews the initial TRA plan to ensure it has all the 
essential information. (Reliable) 
• TRA team has adequate time and resources to execute the TRA plan. 
(Reliable) 
• TRA team obtains key information to conduct the TRA, such as the 
program master schedule, budget documents, test plans, and a 
technical baseline description that describes the program’s purpose, 
system, performance characteristics, and system configuration. 
(Objective) 
• The level of detail for the TRA is consistent with the level of detail 
(evidence) available for the program. (Objective) 
  
=== page 52 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 47 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
 
 
Establishing a disciplined and repeatable process to identify and select 
CTs is paramount to conducting a high-quality TRA. Selecting CTs during 
early technology development before product development is a best 
practice. Subject matter experts with key knowledge, skills and expertise 
are necessary to accurately evaluate elements of the system or 
architecture design and the operating environments and subsequently 
identify the enabling CTs. Technologies identified as critical may change 
as programmatic or mission-related changes occur, system requirements 
are revised, or if technologies do not mature as planned.32 
Technologies are considered critical if they are new or novel, or used in a 
new or novel way, and needed for a system to meet its operational 
performance requirements within defined cost and schedule parameters. 
                                                                                                                       
32There are multiple reasons why CTs of an acquisition program can change. During 
technology development, these changes may reflect cost, schedule, and performance 
trade-offs designed to make a program less risky or more affordable. In other cases, 
changing or adding critical technologies can increase cost and schedule risk. For 
example, GAO has found that if performance requirements are added, or changed 
significantly to a program later in the acquisition life-cycle—such as during product 
development—these may cause significant cost increases and schedule growth. In such 
cases where changes occur in architecture, component, or technology, an additional TRA 
that target the changes may be warranted. 
Step 2 – Identify the 
Critical Technologies 
Critical Technologies 
Defined 
=== page 53 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 48 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Government agencies, such as DOD and DOE use similar definitions.33 
DOD developed the most common definition of CTs, but organizations 
have adopted or modified the definitions to suit their particular needs. 
According to DOD, in general, technologies may also be critical from a 
manufacturing process or material, measurement, or infrastructure 
perspective, including whether an organization has a workforce with the 
necessary skills, knowledge, and experience to fulfill their mission.  
Program officials sometimes disregard CTs when they have longstanding 
history, knowledge, or familiarity with heritage technologies that have 
been successfully used in operation. This is problematic in terms of cost 
increases, schedule delays, or technical performance problems when 
these technologies are reapplied in new ways where the form, fit or 
function may be different. The same is true when the environment in 
which the technology will be operated in its new application differs from 
which it was originally qualified. 
Case study 5 illustrates that officials risk overruns in cost and schedule 
and can encounter performance shortfalls when they fail to identify all 
CTs for programs with which they have had experience. 
  
                                                                                                                       
33Department of Defense, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering, 
DOD Technology Readiness Assessment Guidance (Washington, D.C.: Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (ASD(R&E)), April 2011); U.S. 
Department of Energy, Technology Readiness Assessment Guide, (DOE G 413.3-4A 
(Washington, D.C.: Oct. 12, 2009). 
=== page 54 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 49 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Case Study 5: Program Updates Can Change Critical Technologies, an Example 
from DOD, cited in GAO-02-201 
The Army began to develop the Crusader—a lighter and more deployable advanced 
field artillery system to replace the Paladin system—in 1994, and changed its 
requirements in 2000. In 2002, GAO found that the Army had overestimated the 
maturity of critical technologies and risked cost overruns, schedule delays, and 
performance shortfalls by prematurely committing the program to product 
development. For example, DOD viewed the Army’s long time experience with certain 
technologies within the program as one reason for the Army’s failure to identify all 
critical technologies. GAO recommended, among other things, that the Army further 
mature the Crusader’s technologies before committing to product development and 
assess the projected capabilities and fielding schedules for future combat systems as 
part of the Crusader’s milestone decision for beginning product development. 
GAO, Defense Acquisitions: Steps to Improve the Crusader Program’s Investment 
Decisions, GAO-02-201 (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 25, 2002). 
 
Correctly identifying and selecting CTs can prevent wasting valuable 
resources—funds and schedule—later in the acquisition program. There 
should be no limitations on the number of CTs, but if an overly 
conservative approach is used and CTs are over-identified, resources can 
be diverted from those technologies that require an intense maturation 
effort. However, the under-identification of CTs because of a real or 
perceived limitation on the number of CTs allowed may prove disastrous 
in that such areas may fail to meet requirements, resulting in overall 
system failure. In addition, the under-identification of critical technologies 
may result in a poor representation of the number of interfaces or 
integration needs which are one of the significant causes of system 
failures. 
 
While the process to collect evidence for identifying CTs can be 
straightforward, the determination for what constitutes a CT requires 
knowledge, experience, and due professional care. For example, 
professional judgements need to be made about what a technology is, 
what makes a technology critical, and at what level (e.g., subcomponent, 
component, system, or element) it is appropriate to test, demonstrate, 
and affirm key functions of that technology. Many CTs at the 
subcomponent or subsystem level may consist of multiple technologies 
made up of hardware with embedded software. Some organizations, such 
as DOE, may define a CT as a process used to treat waste material. In its 
Considerations in 
Selecting Critical 
Technologies 
=== page 55 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 50 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
May 2005 TRA Deskbook, Appendix D, DOD developed a repository of 
key questions to help program managers and technology developers 
identify CTs for the various type of applications, such as: 
• aircraft; 
• ground vehicles; 
• missiles; 
• ships, submarines, and naval weapons systems; 
• information systems, networked communications systems; 
• business systems; 
• mission planning systems; 
• embedded IT in tactical systems; and 
• manufacturing. 
Organizations should build similar strategies to help identify CTs. Case 
study 6 illustrates the importance of how narrow definitions can affect the 
selection of CTs for assessment. 
  
=== page 56 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 51 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Case Study 6: Narrow View of Critical Technologies Can Result in the 
Underrepresentation of Technical Risks, an Example from DOD, cited in 
GAO-18-158 
The Navy’s Columbia class ballistic missile submarines will replace the 14 Ohio class 
that currently provide the sea-based leg of the U.S. nuclear triad, slated to begin 
retiring in 2027. Additional development and testing are required to demonstrate the 
maturity of several Columbia class submarine technologies that are critical to 
performance, including the Integrated Power System, nuclear reactor, common 
missile compartment, and propulsor and related coordinated stern technologies. 
In 2015, the Navy conducted a TRA on the Columbia-class submarine program as 
part of its efforts to build 12 nuclear powered ballistic missile submarines for $126 
billion. In using criteria from GAO’s TRA Guide to evaluate the quality and 
completeness of the Navy’s assessment of technology readiness and risk, GAO 
found that the Navy underrepresented the program’s technology risks in its TRA 
when it did not identify several technologies as critical. We reported that the Navy did 
not follow our identified best practices for identifying critical technologies for the 
program, resulting in an underrepresentation of the technical risk. Development of 
critical technologies is key to meeting cost, schedule, and performance requirements. 
A high-quality TRA serves as the basis for realistic discussions on how to mitigate 
risks as programs move forward from the early stages of technology development. 
Not identifying these technologies as critical means Congress may not have had the 
full picture of the technology risks and their potential effect on cost, schedule, and 
performance goals as increasing financial commitments were made. 
GAO, Columbia Class Submarine: Immature Technologies Present Risks to 
Achieving Cost, Schedule, and Performance Goals, GAO-18-158 (Washington, D.C.: 
December 21, 2017). 
 
 
CTs should be rigorously identified and documented to ensure the TRA is 
credible, objective, reliable, and useful. The approach should be open 
and transparent to everyone in the process. This includes, but is not 
limited to, representatives from the research and development program 
office, the test community, and the science, engineering and user 
communities. Figure 5 depicts four steps that should help organizations 
identify and select their CTs. The steps can be scaled to projects of all 
sizes, from component technology development to large scale program 
acquisition. 
 
Four Steps for Selecting 
Critical Technologies 
=== page 57 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 52 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 5: Four Steps for Selecting Critical Technologies (CT) 
 
The agency’s policy or guidance establishes the approach for identifying 
CTs. In the absence of policy or guidance, the TRA team and program 
manager may reach an agreement on the approach to use. The most 
common approach that agencies and other organizations use is the work 
breakdown structure (WBS)—a deconstruction of a program’s end 
product into smaller specific elements that are suitable for management 
control. It is the cornerstone of every program because it defines in detail 
the work necessary to accomplish a program’s objectives. A WBS 
provides a consistent framework for planning and assigning responsibility 
for the work, and is an essential element for identifying activities in a 
program’s integrated master schedule. The WBS is initially set up when a 
program is established and becomes successively detailed over time as 
more information becomes known about the program. Establishing a 
product-oriented WBS allows a program to track cost and schedule by 
defined deliverables, such as a hardware or software component. 
The WBS is a key reference document that looks broadly at all the task 
sets or elements of a system, subsystem, or software architecture being 
developed. A technical WBS helps to enforce a rigorous, systematic, and 
repeatable TRA process when reconciling the identification of CTs. It can 
Step 1 
=== page 58 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 53 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
be used to identify CTs as well as low-risk heritage technologies.34 Figure 
6 shows a WBS with common elements for a sea system.  
Figure 6: A Common Element Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) 
 
A well-defined WBS clearly delineates the logical relationship of all 
program elements and helps promote accountability by identifying work 
products that are independent of one another. Failing to include all work 
for all deliverables can lead to schedule delays and subsequent cost 
increases. It can also result in confusion among team members. 
A well-developed WBS or equivalent supporting documentation is 
essential to the success of all acquisition programs. The WBS is typically 
developed and maintained by a systems engineering process that 
produces a product-oriented family tree of elements, or tasks that are 
critical to the successful development of the project. It can be thought of 
as an illustration of what work will be accomplished to satisfy a program’s 
requirements. Elements such as hardware, software, and data are further 
broken down into specific lower-level elements. The lowest level of the 
WBS is defined as the work package level. By breaking work down into 
smaller elements, management can more easily plan and schedule the 
program’s activities and assign responsibility for the work. 
                                                                                                                       
34Heritage technologies can become critical if they are being used in a new way where the 
form, fit, or function is changed; the environment to which it will be exposed in its new 
application is different than those for which it was originally qualified, or process changes 
have been made in its manufacture. 

=== page 59 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 54 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
At the lower levels, a contractor or technology developer should also 
develop a WBS that extends to include the lower-level components to 
reflect its responsibilities. Because it is composed of all products that 
constitute a system, these lower-level WBS’ can identify all the 
technologies used by the system. Depending on the new or novel 
technologies that are needed for a system, CTs may be selected from 
these lower level components. Figure 7 shows how a contract WBS may 
be depicted from the larger WBS to illustrate one aspect of lower level 
components. 
Figure 7: A Contract Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) 
 

=== page 60 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 55 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 7 shows how a prime contractor may require its subcontractor to 
use the WBS to report work progress. In this example, the fire control 
effort (a level 3 element in the prime contractor’s WBS) is the first level for 
the subcontractor. Thus, all fire control elements at level 1 of the 
subcontractor’s contract WBS would map to the fire control element at 
level 3 in the program WBS. This shows how a subcontractor would break 
a level 3 item down to lower levels to accomplish the work. 
Similarly, a WBS for a project that has software elements should be 
broken down into specific lower level components as needed. Table 3 
shows a WBS for a software project. 
Table 3: Software Implementation Project Work Breakdown Structure 
Level 2 element Level 3 element 
1.1 Project management  
1.2 Product requirements 1.2.1 Software requirements 
1.2.2 User documentation 
1.2.3 Training program materials 
1.2.4 Hardware 
1.2.5 Implementation and future support 
1.3 Detail software design 1.3.1 Initial software design 
1.3.2 Final software design 
1.3.3 Software design approval 
1.4 System construction 1.4.1 Configured software 
1.4.2 Customized user documentation 
1.4.3 Customized training program materials 
1.4.4 Installed hardware 
1.4.5 Implementation & future support 
1.5 Test 1.5.1 System test plan 
1.5.2 System test cases 
1.5.3 System test results 
1.5.4 Acceptance test plan 
1.5.5 Acceptance test cases 
1.5.6 Acceptance test results 
1.5.7 Approved user documentation 
1.6 Go live  
1.7 Support 1.7.1 Training 
1.7.2 End user support 
1.7.3 Product support 
Source: The Project Management Institute, Inc., Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures, 2d ed., © (2006). All rights 
reserved. Unauthorized reproduction of this material is strictly prohibited. | GAO-20-48G 
=== page 61 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 56 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The use of WBS as a means of identifying CTs has several benefits, 
including: 
• readily available; 
• evolves with the system concept and design; 
• represents all products or elements that constitute a system and, thus, 
is an apt means to identify all the technologies used by the system; 
• relates the system design and architecture and the environment in 
which the system is intended to be employed; and 
• reflects the relationships between the parts, the end product, and the 
tasks to be completed for each product in the system. 
Using the WBS should be feasible for most programs, because it can be 
viewed as a structure around which to organize a program, no matter its 
size. At the earlier phases of development, a detailed WBS may not be 
available. It is acceptable to substitute early requirements and potential 
operating environments from documents, broad agency announcements, 
request for information, market surveys, actual results from government- 
or industry-funded efforts, program risk registers, and initial system 
design concepts being considered. Programs during this phase may also 
use a reverse engineering approach that relies on program requirements 
to determine which technologies are critical by focusing on those needed 
for the system to meet its performance requirements. 
The nature of a project can also affect whether it is not possible to use a 
WBS to identify CTs. For example, DOE’s Office of Environmental 
Management has determined that the WBS may not be all-inclusive for 
identifying CTs for its applications, so the office examines system flow 
sheets or diagrams (for example, those of chemical or nuclear waste 
processing facilities). In this approach, DOE determines the technologies 
by examining those technology elements that constitute the system flow 
sheet. This includes examining the interfaces and dependencies with 
other facilities and supporting infrastructure. All the technologies are 
evaluated against criteria to determine which are CTs. Figure 8 shows a 
simplified flow sheet of the technology elements for the Low Activity 
Waste Pretreatment System project at DOE’s Hanford site. 
=== page 62 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 57 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 8: A Process Technology Flow Diagram (simplified) 
 
 
Technology elements are determined to be critical based on the CT 
definition (criteria) as specified in the organizations policy or guide, and 
cited in the TRA plan. In addition, criteria in the form of questions can be 
used to help in determining the initial list of CTs. The program manager or 
technology developer (or a designee) is generally responsible for 
identifying the initial list of CTs. This is accomplished by applying the CT 
definition and key questions coupled with the WBS, process flow diagram, 
or a similar approach.35 Early identification of CTs may allow the program 
manager or technology developer to identify any additional areas of 
                                                                                                                       
35A process flow diagram is a diagram commonly used in chemical and process 
engineering to indicate the general flow of plant processes and equipment. The process 
flow diagram displays the relationship between major equipment of a plant facility and 
does not show minor details, such as piping details and designations. 
Step 2 
=== page 63 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 58 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
technical expertise that are needed on the TRA team in order to fully 
evaluate the program. 
We have compiled a list of questions from government agency TRA 
guides that can be used as a baseline in defining CTs and helping 
reconcile any disagreements between the team members, programmatic 
teams, or governance bodies. If the answer is “yes” to at least one 
question in each of the two lists, this signals the need to consider the 
technology for inclusion in the initial list of CTs. 
Technical questions: 
• Is this technology new (for example, next generation)? 
• Is the technology used in a novel way? 
• Has the technology been modified? 
• Is the technology expected to perform beyond its original design 
intention or demonstrated capability? 
• Is the technology being used in a particular or different system 
architecture or operational environment than it was originally intended 
or designed for?36 
• Could the technology have potential adverse interactions with 
systems with which it will interface? 
Programmatic questions: 
• Do requirements definitions for this technology contain uncertainties? 
• Does the technology directly affect a functional requirement? 
• Could limitations in understanding this technology significantly affect 
cost (for example, overruns) or affordability? 
• Could limitations in understanding this technology significantly affect 
schedule (for example, not ready for insertion when required)? 
• Could limitations in understanding this technology significantly affect 
performance? 
                                                                                                                       
36The readiness of technology can vary greatly depending on the intended environment in 
which the system will operate. When there are deviations from the prior environment and 
the intended environment, the planned use of the technology by the program or project 
needs to be re-evaluated (i.e., a mature technology in one environment may be less 
mature in another). 
=== page 64 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 59 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
These questions are not comprehensive; they serve as a starting point for 
more in-depth questions that could be answered at different 
organizational levels. More detailed questions originate from the 
organization’s knowledge base using engineering judgment or lessons 
learned and could be refined or tailored to match the program 
requirements. A best practice is for the TRA team and others, as 
appropriate, to confirm the list using more specific questions and 
requirements that pertain to the platform, program, or system in which 
they will operate. 
Subject matter experts inside or outside the program with the requisite 
technical knowledge and the independence needed to make unbiased, 
objective decisions should guide answering the questions asked for each 
CT candidate. 
A best practice is to annotate the WBS and then list CTs with the reasons 
why other technologies were not selected. This allows anyone who 
participates in the TRA to see an account of how the CTs were 
systematically determined. 
The TRA team either affirms or refines the initial list of CTs. The TRA 
team may resolve any internal disagreements over the initial list of CTs 
and then should document the reasons behind the determination of each. 
If consensus cannot be reached, the TRA team leader makes the final 
determination, but alternate viewpoints should be documented and 
included in the final report. 
In addition, the TRA team may critique the CT list or make its own list. If 
the TRA is being conducted for governance purposes, the list of CTs may 
be reviewed by members of the governance body, including acquisition 
executives, component heads, and agency senior leaders. CTs may be 
added to the list or removed, but these decisions should be transparent 
and documented. For knowledge-building TRAs, this process can be less 
formal but best practices should still be followed to the maximum extent 
possible. 
Organizations should consider developing or tailoring guidance on how 
best to approach the determination (identification and selection) of CTs 
for their specific application, including communication across the 
organization with regard to decisions or activities that could affect how 
CTs are identified. The most common pitfall among organizations is that 
changes are not communicated to others. This often happens when 
Step 3 
=== page 65 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 60 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
technology development and product or system development occur in 
parallel under different organizations. 
A best practice is for the TRA team to consider the intended operational 
environment in which they will operate when identifying CTs, and their 
interaction with other systems with which the technology being developed 
should interface. Technologies can be wrongly excluded as critical when 
programs have longstanding history, knowledge, or familiarity with them. 
By understanding the operational environment and interactions with other 
systems, CTs can be more easily identifiable. This consideration of 
interactions highlights whether the technology is being used in a new or 
novel way and whether it can have an adverse impact on the system. In 
addition, identifying the aspects of the intended operational environment 
that may be stressors or risks for the successful operation of a CT can 
help determine the relevant parts of the environment that should be the 
focus of earlier demonstrations and testing. The identification of CTs 
should be defined at a level that is testable, which could include the 
software needed to demonstrate their functionality. 
The program manager, TRA team, or governance body repeats the 
determination process, as needed. An early agreement should be 
reached on how changes to the list of CTs will be handled, so that those 
involved in the TRA process can be aware of changes in other 
organizations, departments, or centers that could affect the assessment 
and that communication links be established between technology 
developers and system engineers. During technology development and 
system development, it is likely that decisions could affect which 
technologies are considered critical.37 These decisions may include 
changes to the system’s proposed capabilities, its design, or its intended 
operational environment. In addition, alternative technologies may be 
selected as new technologies become available or if other technologies 
do not mature as expected. Thus, CTs may be added or removed from 
the list during the TRA process. These decisions should be documented 
and reviewed. 
 
                                                                                                                       
37This Guide refers to “technology development” as the design, development, and 
engineering of a critical technology or group of technologies, whereas “system 
development” refers to the design, engineering development, or product development of a 
system. 
Step 4 
=== page 66 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 61 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
While selecting CTs is fundamental to the TRA, some technologies may 
not be characterized as a CT but are nevertheless important and could 
pose concern if certain conditions changed. For example, the TRA team 
may identify additional “watch items” that represent significant risk areas 
once system trades are final. Highlighting these watch items adds an 
additional level of visibility throughout the project.  
While TRAs are not generally considered to be program assessments 
because the focus is on individual technologies, organizations have 
included areas beyond CTs as part of their internal TRA guides and 
processes. For example, the Air Force considers programmatic issues 
important to evaluations because these can affect technology 
development. The Air Force includes program issues in its TRL 
calculator, a tool for identifying, evaluating, and tracking CTs.38 DOE has 
also developed standard TRL calculators that include programmatic 
aspects.39  
A best practices checklist that includes the corresponding high-quality 
characteristics related to identifying the CTs is included below. 
• CTs are selected by following a reliable, disciplined, and repeatable 
process. (Reliable) 
• CTs are selected based on consideration of the newness or novelty of 
technologies and how they plan to be used (Credible) 
• CTs are selected based on consideration of the operational 
performance requirements and its potential to affect cost and 
schedule outcomes. (Credible) 
                                                                                                                       
38Some experts familiar with the tool assert that the calculator is useful in applying the TRL 
concept to research and development programs. They report that the calculator simplifies 
determining the appropriate TRL for a given technology. By presenting a standard set of 
questions to users, the calculator makes the process repeatable. The standard format 
facilitates the comparison of different technologies and can accommodate both hardware 
and software development projects. Other experts do not agree with the use of calculators 
because of concerns associated with box-checking where critical evaluation could be 
compromised. 
39DOE has developed standard TRL calculators that not only address technical maturity, 
but also include programmatic and manufacturability aspects associated with the critical 
technology elements. Additionally, due to the general types of application of the TRA 
process within the DOE Office of Environmental Management (e.g., radioactive chemical 
waste processing systems) that organization includes TRL calculators that assess the 
maturity of the integrated processing system at critical decision points in the project. 
Identification of Other 
Important Technologies 
and Programmatic Issues 
Best Practice Checklist: 
Identifying the Critical 
Technologies 
=== page 67 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 62 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• A relevant environment is derived for each CT from those aspects of 
the operational environment determined to be a risk for the successful 
operation of that technology. (Credible) 
• The potential adverse interaction with systems which the technology 
being developed should interface is considered as part of the 
determination of CTs. (Credible) 
• The selection of CTs is confirmed, using more specific questions and 
requirements that pertain to the platform, program, or system in which 
they will operate, is confirmed by the TRA team and others, as 
appropriate. (Objective) 
• The number of CTs selected for the assessment is not arbitrary and is 
based on solid analysis using the WBS, technical baseline 
description, process flow diagrams, or other key program documents. 
(Objective) 
• CTs are selected during early development. (Credible) 
• CTs are defined at a testable level, including any software needed to 
demonstrate their functionality. (Credible) 
• The TRA team documents the reasons why technologies are selected 
as critical, including reasons why other technologies are not selected 
as critical. (Reliable) 
  
=== page 68 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 63 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
 
 
 
To determine the maturity of CTs, the TRA team assesses them and 
determines a TRL for each one.40 The TRLs are determined through an 
objective evaluation of information against general criteria. These criteria 
are defined in the TRL descriptions and are confirmed by the program 
manager, technology developer, and TRA team lead. 
To conduct a high-quality assessment of CTs, the TRA team needs 
access to all the relevant information. Such information may include 
schematics, test data, and analytical reports, among other key 
information. Depending on whether the TRA team is to certify the 
readiness of CTs for a governance body at a decision point or assess the 
maturation of technologies as a knowledge-building exercise, both the 
program manager and the TRA lead should understand why the 
assessment is being conducted, what constitutes sufficient evidence that 
a specified TRL has been achieved, and within what operational 
environment the technology is expected to operate. 
 
                                                                                                                       
40Conducting an independent assessment of CT’s is crucial to establishing confidence in 
the TRA. The independent TRA team should verify, modify, and correct an assessment as 
necessary to ensure realism, completeness, and consistency. 
Step 3 – Assess the 
Critical Technologies 
=== page 69 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 64 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Evaluating CTs is the primary purpose of the TRA. Figure 9 depicts three 
steps that can help organizations ensure that an evaluation is objective 
and reliable by applying a disciplined and repeatable process. In some 
cases, the steps can be tailored to accommodate organizational 
structures, processes, and policies. 
Figure 9: Three Steps to Evaluate Critical Technologies (CT) 
 
The TRA team confirms whether the TRL measures and definitions 
selected during the development of the TRA plan are still appropriate. 
The TRA team meets with the program manager or technology developer, 
with input from the systems engineering community, to discuss the kinds 
of evidence that are sufficient to demonstrate that a CT has achieved a 
specific TRL, or other stated goal. A best practice is that the TRA team 
should interview the test officials and verify that the test article and the 
relevant or operational environment used for testing are acceptable. 
The TRA team conducts the assessment and reviews the information 
(evidence). Information to review can include, but is not limited to, a 
summary of the program’s purpose, requirements, key performance 
Three Steps for Evaluating 
Critical Technologies 
Step 1 
Step 2 
=== page 70 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 65 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
parameters, and capabilities so that the TRA team can objectively 
evaluate the CT in proper context. If necessary, additional information is 
obtained from the program manager and technology developer in order to 
evaluate the CTs and assign a TRL or determine whether a goal has 
been met. When possible, the TRA team should consider any analogous 
system technology assessments to aid their review. Additionally, in cases 
where synergy can be gained by examining similar or related systems, 
relevant and operational environments, and concepts of operations, the 
TRA team should take full advantage of applicable technology maturity 
artifacts. Once the TRA team considers the information and reaches a 
consensus, it generally chooses one of the following options: 
• Option 1 - The TRA team reaches agreement because the fidelity of 
the test article (or digital model or constructive simulation) and test or 
simulation environment are appropriate, data are sufficient, and the 
results are acceptable such that no further evidence or assessment is 
needed.41 
• Option 2 - If the TRA team determines that information is insufficient 
to render a credible, objective, and reliable decision, the team asks 
the program manager for more information to make a TRL rating 
determination for each CT. The interaction between the TRA team 
and program manager is often an iterative process as discussions can 
highlight the need for more information, or raise additional questions. 
• Option 3 - The TRA team may determine that a TRL rating cannot be 
assigned because the fidelity of the test article or test environment is 
insufficient and information and test results are inconclusive. Such 
cases are unusual but can occur. When they do, the TRA team 
identifies the inadequacies and works with the program manager to 
determine what should be done to conduct a TRA. 
Programs should establish channels of communication across the 
organization so that decisions or activities that can affect whether the CTs 
being evaluated may need to be reconsidered or reassessed. The most 
common pitfall among organizations is that changes are not coordinated 
                                                                                                                       
41The TRA team defines the appropriate (or acceptable) test environments, which may 
differ from those that the program manager selects. The test environment should reflect 
what was determined to be the appropriate relevant environment for the technology being 
tested. For example, an overdesigned system (assumed to be more costly) will 
demonstrate acceptability with minimal data, while a marginal system will require a lot of 
data (assumed to be costly) to tighten-up the statistics. Engineering judgment could allow 
a “Goldilocks” system—that is, acceptable performance requiring not too much data 
(system not too expensive) to prove acceptability. 
=== page 71 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 66 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
or communicated with others, particularly when technology development 
or system development occurs in parallel under different organizations. 
Gaps in communications can be costly and result in unnecessary 
schedule delays. 
The TRA team summarizes the TRL rating of each CT, including 
supporting documentation, to justify the assigned TRL. Table 4 lists one 
generic list of supporting information that can be extracted or referenced 
to support a TRL rating. Because the definitions are not all inclusive and 
can vary by technology and application, organizations can tailor the 
definitions to accommodate their own application. Other TRL definitions 
can be found in appendix IV. 
Table 4: Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) and the Information Needed to Demonstrate Them for Hardware and Software 
  Supporting information needed 
TRL Definition Hardware Software 
1 Basic principles observed 
and reported 
Published research that identifies the principles that 
underlie this technology; references who, where, 
and when 
Basic research activities, research articles, 
peer-reviewed white papers, point papers, 
and early laboratory model of basic concept 
may be useful for substantiating the TRL 
2 Technology concept or 
application formulated 
Publications or other references that outline the 
application being considered and provide analysis 
to support the concept 
Applied research activities, analytic studies, 
small code units, and papers comparing 
competing technologies 
3 Analytical and 
experimental critical 
function or characteristic 
proof of concept 
Results of laboratory tests performed to measure 
parameters of interest and compared to analytical 
predictions for critical subsystems; references who, 
where, and when these tests and comparisons 
were performed 
Algorithms running on a surrogate processor 
in a laboratory environment, instrumented 
components operating in a laboratory 
environment, or laboratory results showing 
validation of critical properties 
4 Component or breadboard 
validation in a laboratory 
environment 
System concepts have been considered and 
results from testing laboratory scale breadboards; 
references who did this work and when; provides 
an estimate of how breadboard hardware and test 
results differ from the expected system goals 
Advanced technology development, stand-
alone prototype solving a synthetic full-scale 
problem, or standalone prototype processing 
fully representative data sets 
5 Component or breadboard 
validation in relevant 
environment 
Results from testing a laboratory breadboard 
system are integrated with other supporting 
elements in a simulated operational environment; 
addresses how the “relevant environment” differs 
from the expected operational environment, how 
the test results compare with expectations, what 
problems, if any, were encountered, and whether 
the breadboard system was refined to more nearly 
match the expected system goals 
System architecture diagram around 
technology element with critical performance 
requirements are defined; includes a 
processor selection analysis and a 
simulation/stimulation (Sim/Stim) laboratory 
buildup plan. Software is placed under 
configuration management and identifies 
commercial-of-the-shelf/government-off-the-
shelf components in the system software 
architecture 
Step 3 
=== page 72 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 67 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
  Supporting information needed 
TRL Definition Hardware Software 
6 System and subsystem 
model or prototype 
demonstration in a relevant 
environment 
Results from laboratory testing of a prototype 
system that is near the desired configuration in 
performance, weight, and volume; answers how the 
test environment differs from the operational 
environment, who performed the tests, how the test 
results compared with expectations, what 
problems, if any, were encountered, and what 
problems, plans, options, or actions need to be 
resolved before moving to the next level 
Results from laboratory testing of a 
prototype package that is near the desired 
configuration in performance, including 
physical, logical, data, and security 
interfaces; comparisons of tested 
environment and operational environment 
are analytically understood; analysis and 
test measurements have been obtained by 
quantifying contribution to systemwide 
requirements, such as throughput, 
scalability, and reliability; analysis of human-
computer (user environment) has begun 
7 System prototype 
demonstration in an 
operational environment 
Results from testing a prototype system in an 
operational environment; answers who performed 
the tests, how tests compared with expectations, 
any problems encountered, the plans, options, or 
actions to resolve problems before moving to the 
next level 
Critical technological properties have been 
measured against requirements in an 
operational environment 
8 Actual system is completed 
and qualified by test and 
demonstration 
Shows testing results of the system in its final 
configuration under the expected range of 
environmental conditions in which it will be 
expected to operate; the system’s ability to meet its 
operational requirements has been assessed and 
problems documented; plans, options, or actions to 
resolve problems have been determined before the 
final design  
Published documentation and product 
technology refresh build schedule exist for 
the system; software resource reserves 
have been measured and tracked 
9 Actual system has been 
proven in successful 
mission operations 
Operational, test, and evaluation reports Production configuration management 
reports confirm operational success; 
technology is integrated into a reuse 
“wizard” 
Source: GAO presentation of Department of Defense information. | GAO-20-48G 
 
High-quality TRAs rely upon artifacts and information, such as 
requirement documents, analyses, test reports, and environmental test 
results. The availability of such information can depend on the acquisition 
phase of the CT, technology application, and level of complexity of the 
technology. These can range from simple technologies with just a few 
drawings to very technical analytical reports on nuclear waste facilities, 
space systems, defense weapon systems, or highly distributed 
information technology business systems. 
The program manager and the TRA team use this information and the 
summaries as support when writing the TRA report. If the TRA team and 
program manager cannot reach consensus on a TRL rating, the 
dissenting views should be presented in the TRA report and accompanied 
by evidence that supports both sides (see the chapter titled Step 4 - 
=== page 73 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 68 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Prepare the TRA Report for information on how dissenting views should 
be addressed and documented). 
 
As technologies mature, TRAs are conducted to determine whether the 
supporting information can demonstrate the state of progress and 
whether it has reached a certain TRL goal or expectation. CT 
performance should ultimately be demonstrated in an operational 
environment before it is considered mature enough to begin integration 
into the system, typically at TRL 7. In some special cases, such as the 
space environment, it would be impractical to test a technology in its 
operational environment, so TRL 6 can be acceptable.  
The TRA team conducting the assessment documents the state of the CT 
(experimental test article, breadboard, brass board, or prototype) and how 
its TRL rating differed from the expected maturity goal, if at all. The 
description of the test article includes drawings and photographs; the TRA 
team may have examined the article or interviewed test officials to verify 
that these are acceptable artifacts. The test environment should be 
described in sufficient detail that the TRA team can understand how the 
test environment differs from the operational environment. Test results 
include demonstration of performance and sufficiency. Adequate 
performance is demonstrated when test results show that the test article 
performed as required. Sufficiency is demonstrated when enough 
repetitions with consistent results have demonstrated required statistical 
significance. A minimum number of repetitions are required to achieve 
statistical significance. In addition, testing and performance verification 
may be augmented with calibrated models and simulations. 
When and where applicable, other supporting information to be recorded 
includes: 
• identification of test agencies; 
• when and where tests are performed; 
• the cause of problems encountered, their solutions, and resulting 
changes in the test plan; and 
• unresolved issues discovered in testing and the plans, options, or 
actions required before moving further in development. 
For CTs related specifically to information technology, the environment 
includes physical, logical, data, and security environments, such as: 
Documenting Test Results 
and the Operational 
Environment for 
Assessments 
=== page 74 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 69 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• the physical environment includes mechanical components, 
processors, servers, and electronics; thermal and heat transfer; 
electrical and electromagnetic; threat (e.g., jammers); climatic—
weather, temperature, particulate; network infrastructure; 
• the logical environment includes other applications, run-time (e.g., 
operating system, and middleware), security interfaces, web 
enablement, layers of abstraction, communication protocols, and 
backward compatibility; 
• the data environment includes formats, structures, models, schemas, 
data rates, latency, and data packaging and framing; and 
• the security environment includes firewalls, appliqués, nature of the 
cyber adversary, methods of attack, trust establishment, and security 
domains. 
 
CTs need to be selected and named for the technologies themselves, not 
the functionality or other nontechnology approaches. Since a TRL rating 
reflects the status of the technology being evaluated, the focus should 
remain on that selection. For programs with an unwieldy number of CTs, 
especially programs like systems of systems, it may be beneficial to 
group critical technologies into several smaller, logical subsets that are 
easier to track, allowing for a more focused evaluation. For example, 
while a program may have 100 CTs, similar critical technologies could be 
grouped into several subsets of 10-12 CTs. Specifically, the F-35 program 
office (formerly called Joint Strike Fighter) identified CT areas 
encompassing avionics, flight systems, manufacturing and producibility, 
propulsion, supportability, and weapons delivery system, all of which were 
made up of many components. It is important to note that the TRL is 
determined by the lowest TRL of CTs within a group, and is not an 
average of all the TRLs in a subset or larger group set. 
 
The use of TRL calculators as a tool to assess CT’s has drawn mixed 
views. Some experts familiar with calculators assert that they are useful in 
applying the TRL concept to research and development projects. These 
proponents report that the calculator simplifies determining the 
appropriate TRL for a given CT. By presenting a standard set of 
questions to users, the calculator makes the process repeatable. The 
standard format facilitates the comparison of different technologies and 
can accommodate both hardware and software development programs. 
Other experts do not support the use of calculators because they might 
facilitate box-checking, which could compromise critical judgements. 
Creating Critical 
Technology Subsets for 
Exceptionally Large or 
Complex Programs 
Using TRL Calculators 
=== page 75 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 70 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
At DOE, a standard TRL calculator is used to evaluate technical maturity, 
but is also used on programmatic and manufacturability aspects, 
associated with the critical technology elements. Additionally, due to the 
general types of application of the TRA process within the DOE Office of 
Environmental Management (e. g., radioactive chemical waste processing 
systems), the organization includes TRL calculators that assess the 
maturity of the integrated processing system at critical decision points in 
the project. 
A best practices checklist that includes the corresponding high-quality 
characteristics related to evaluating the CTs is included below. 
• The TRA team confirms the TRL measure and definitions selected 
during the planning phase is still appropriate, and reaches agreement 
with the program manager on kinds of evidence needed to 
demonstrate that a TRA goal or objective has been met. (Reliable) 
• The TRA team interviews the testing officials and verifies that the test 
article and the relevant or operational environment used for testing 
are acceptable and that the results are sufficient. (Objective) 
• The TRA team assigns a TRL rating for each CT based on credible 
and verified evidence, such as test and analytical reports, 
requirements documents, schematics, and other key documents. 
(Objective) 
  
Best Practice Checklist: 
Evaluating the Critical 
Technologies 
=== page 76 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 71 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
 
 
TRA reports provide useful information about the maturity of technology, 
its state of development, and the potential areas of concern and risk. The 
information can put decision makers in a better position to identify 
maturity gaps, formulate plans for maturing technologies, address 
potential concerns, and determine whether programs that will integrate 
CTs have achieved TRLs at a certain decision point and are ready to 
move to the next acquisition phase.  
Agencies should have policy or guidance on how TRA reports should be 
prepared, including the processes and steps to create the report; 
reporting elements; process for submittal, review and approval, how the 
results are communicated, and who is involved in the process. For 
auditors, these processes and the TRA report provide sufficient evidence 
of the practices used to conduct high-quality TRAs. Because stakeholders 
review TRA reports with different perspectives and goals, the information 
should be presented clearly and logically. 
 
The content in a TRA report can vary based on its purpose. TRA reports 
for governance purposes are developed to certify whether CTs have met 
an expected TRL rating and governing authorities use them to determine 
whether a program is ready to move to the next acquisition phase. 
Knowledge-building TRA reports prepared for program managers and 
technology developers are conducted with a focus on maturing 
technologies, not as a pass/fail assessment. Therefore, the information 
Step 4 – Prepare the 
TRA Report 
The TRA Report 
=== page 77 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 72 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
collected is to be used as a source of information for managing those 
efforts. For example, knowledge-building TRA reports can be used to 
learn about specific aspects of technology or prototype development, 
such as identify gaps in maturity or areas that may be challenging, or 
gather evidence to continue development efforts or initiate steps toward 
using an alternative or backup technology, or determine whether CTs are 
ready for a TRA for governance bodies at an upcoming decision point. 
Figure 10 shows an example of a TRA report template that identifies the 
types of information that should be included. Each organization should 
tailor the template to accommodate how it will report the TRA information. 
For example, some organizations prepare briefing charts as a TRA report 
to comport with their own internal practices. Others prepare detailed 
reports with specific formatting requirements. At a minimum, 
organizations should ensure that the suggested reporting elements in the 
figure are included. 
=== page 78 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 73 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 10: Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) Report Template 
 

=== page 79 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 74 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The TRA team lead prepares and coordinates the TRA report, with 
detailed input from members of the TRA team, before submitting it to the 
appropriate organizational officials. Figure 11 shows five generic steps to 
prepare, coordinate, approve, and document the TRA report. 
Figure 11: Five Steps to Prepare the Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) Report 
 
The TRA report draft is initiated. For this step, the TRA team lead 
documents the introduction and other descriptive information in the TRA 
report. The TRA report summary should explain the function of each CT 
Five Steps for Preparing 
and Submitting the TRA 
Report 
Step 1 
=== page 80 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 75 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
at the component, system, and subsystem levels. The TRA report should 
also explicitly describe the program increments or spiral developments.42 
The TRA team lead summarizes the findings along with references to 
supporting evidence. The evidence may include documented test results 
or applications of technology, technical papers, reports, analyses, and 
other artifacts.43 The report should explain how the material was used or 
interpreted to make the assessment, and reference the sources (including 
chapters or pages) of the evidence presented in the report for determining 
the TRL. Vague or incomplete references to test results or test 
documents are not sufficient.44 In addition, the report should document 
any additional changes to the critical technology list made during the CT 
assessment phase. 
The program manager, technology developer, and other key officials or 
technical staff check the factual accuracy of the TRA report, and the 
appropriate official (program manager, executive or senior level manager) 
prepares a written response. This response may be a cover letter, 
memorandum, or other type of document that is appropriate for the 
organization. For this step, the science and technology executive reviews 
the report and prepares the response, which may include additional 
technical information appropriately indicating concurrence or 
                                                                                                                       
42A program increment or spiral development refers to the specific version of the CTs 
being assessed. CTs evolve and mature as knowledge and experience increases. These 
discrete increments or spiral developments have unique functions, characteristics, and 
designs that distinguish them from earlier versions. Thus, it is important that these specific 
efforts be identified in the TRA report. 
43Some technologies may be large, sophisticated, or technically complex and, therefore, 
have voluminous information. Programs should be prepared to provide the necessary 
documents, and the TRA team should be prepared to list and summarize them in the TRA 
report, as appropriate. 
44A TRL should be assigned with full knowledge of the intended operating environment 
and the derived environment in which the technology is expected to operate. 
Consequently, in the discussion of the TRL assigned, specific reference should be made 
to the demonstrated test results in the context of the test environment relative to the 
relevant environment. 
Step 2 
Step 3 
=== page 81 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 76 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
nonconcurrence with the TRA team’s rating of the CTs.45 The purpose of 
the written response is to document the coordination among the various 
stakeholders and organizations, and agreement or dissenting viewpoints 
with the TRA team’s findings, along with supporting analyses for any 
disagreements. The science and technology executive should certify that 
he/she stands behind the results or provide rationale for any dissenting 
views or differences of opinion. The acquisition executive or appropriate 
official approves the response and forwards it to the organizational or 
agency head.46 If factual accuracies have been compromised—due to 
new information, misinterpretation of data, etc.—the TRA report is revised 
with concurrence of the TRA team to correct any inaccuracies.47 An 
accompanying log should keep an account of how each issue was 
addressed and resolved.48 For TRA reports that are prepared for program 
managers and technology developers, organizations should modify this 
step as necessary to exclude governing bodies. However, there should 
be necessary reviews at the appropriate levels to ensure the information 
is factually correct. 
The TRA customer reviews and approves (signs) the response. The TRA 
report along with the response is forwarded to the agency head or 
designated authority, the organization’s convening independent review 
board, or the governance body. This step is not included for knowledge-
building TRA reports that are specifically prepared for program managers 
and technology developers where the information is strictly used for 
internal management purposes. 
 
                                                                                                                       
45The science and technology executive is identified because the official generally has 
oversight of technology projects entering development early in the acquisition or project 
life-cycle. Agencies or organizations may differ on the executive or senior manager 
responsible for these technology development projects. In some organizations, these 
individuals may be a chief scientist, chief engineer, or project director. The terminology will 
be used to indicate any of these individuals, as appropriate. Agencies and organizations 
should readily identify them and their roles and responsibilities in their respective TRA 
processes. 
46In some organizations, the acquisition executive and the science and technology 
executive may be the same person, such as the Federal Project Director on DOE projects. 
47Some organizations have created an additional step in their TRA report processes to 
account for inaccuracies. 
48The log provides a permanent record of the report evolution and accelerates the final 
review and concurrence process. 
Step 4 
=== page 82 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 77 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The TRA report and the response are documented and maintained by the 
appropriate organization or department as evidence for future reference 
by stakeholders and other interested parties. For this step, depending on 
the complexity of the system and number of CTs assessed, completing 
the report can take anywhere from several days to several weeks after 
the assessment. A TRA report prepared for governance authorities for a 
decision point or stage gate review—such as a Milestone B decision for 
DOD defense programs—should be prepared well in advance of the 
scheduled time to allow decision makers sufficient time for their review. 
The time required to prepare the TRA report will depend on the size of the 
effort, complexity of technology, amount of available technical data to 
review, and purpose and scope of the review. Reports prepared for 
simpler technologies take less time, especially if no critical decisions will 
be based on the rating discussion of the TRA. Organizations should 
establish their timelines for submissions by considering their internal 
review processes, time and resources required, and any policy 
requirements. The report should give citations and summary descriptions 
of the salient aspects of the reference documents that are the basis for 
the answers documented. The TRA team should reference relevant 
portions of the project’s technical assessment reports when developing 
the TRA report.  
Appendix VI provides websites where TRA report examples can be found. 
 
The program manager or other official should prepare a written response 
(via cover letter and memorandum) to indicate agreement or a dissenting 
viewpoint with the TRA rating of the CTs. The written response is 
attached to the TRA report and is coordinated and signed by the 
appropriate senior officials, such as the project manager, science and 
technology executive, acquisition executive, or other organizational head. 
The written response may include other relevant technical information to 
support an opposing view. A formal response is not required if the report 
is prepared as a knowledge-building TRA, where the information is to be 
used for internal purposes only. Organizations may employ similar 
strategies so that differences of opinion can be discussed to reach 
consensus on the TRA report findings. 
Dissenting views can occur when the project manager, science and 
technology executive, or other official disagrees with the TRA team’s 
Step 5 
Final Processing of the 
TRA Report 
Dissenting Views 
=== page 83 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 78 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
conclusions.49 Such differences of opinion are formally documented as a 
memorandum and should be included as an attachment to the TRA 
report. Any major disagreement with the TRA team’s findings should be 
brief and succinctly explained in the written response in a clear, logical, 
and rational way. In addition, dissenting views should be supported by 
sufficient evidence, such as analyses, test documents, and other 
technical information. In other words, the dissenting view should be 
evidence-based, and well supported by a reliable body of evidence. 
Dissenting views for TRA reports that are prepared for knowledge 
building purposes do not need to follow a highly structured review 
process as described above. However, organizations may employ a 
similar approach so that differences of opinion can be discussed to reach 
consensus on the assessment findings. While TRAs conducted for 
knowledge-building purposes do not require external oversight by 
governance bodies, it is essential that organizations perform the 
necessary steps and activities to ensure that the findings are objective 
and useful. 
After completion of the TRA report, organizations should provide the 
information to others who may use them in other key planning and 
analytical documents, such as the TMP, risk management plans, and cost 
and schedule assessments. In this Guide, we discuss the TMP in the next 
chapter as a separate and distinct activity. However, some organizations, 
such as DOE and the National Security Agency, include the TMP as part 
of the TRA report. 
A best practices checklist that includes the corresponding high-quality 
characteristics related to preparing the TRA report is included below. 
• Policy or guidance details how TRA reports should be prepared, 
including a template that identifies the elements to report, process for 
submission, review and approval, how the report should be 
communicated, and who should be involved. (Reliable) 
• The TRA report includes all the key information: (Reliable): 
                                                                                                                       
49At many organizations, the science and technology executive has oversight of 
technology projects during the early technology development acquisition phase. At other 
organizations, this role may be fulfilled by other officials, such as the chief scientist, lead 
engineer, or program or project manager. Therefore, these individuals should be clearly 
identified in the review and approval process.  
Next Steps after Completion of 
the TRA Report 
Best Practice Checklist: 
Preparing the TRA Report 
=== page 84 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 79 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• executive summary 
• program background 
• purpose and scope of the TRA 
• description of the process for conducting the TRA, including the 
selection of CTs 
• rating for each CT assessed 
• supporting evidence for each CT assessed, including references 
to test results and other key documents 
• executive approval of the results 
• Upon completion of the assessment by the TRA team, management 
checks or attests the factual accuracy of the TRA report. (Objective) 
• The TRA report includes management’s written response to the TRL 
rating (i.e., concurrence, or dissenting views in a memorandum or 
cover sheet). For example, if the program manager does not agree 
with the TRA team’s assessment, then the reason for the dissenting 
view should be clearly written, logical, rational, and supported by 
evidence. (Reliable) 
  
=== page 85 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 80 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
 
 
The TRA report is used to inform governance bodies, program managers, 
and technology developers about the readiness of CTs, in order to help 
them make an assortment of decisions. These decisions can range from 
those made by governance bodies to determine if programs that depend 
on CTs are ready to move forward, to those made by program managers 
and technology developers for knowledge-building TRAs who use them in 
their day-to-day responsibilities to mature technologies or to consider 
tradeoffs in light of changes in cost, schedule or program priorities. In 
addition, systems engineers may use TRA reports to better understand 
the transition risks when maturing technologies, or to determine whether 
technologies are ready to transition to new or existing acquisition 
programs. 
It is important to point out that each organization involved in the 
development and maturation of CTs has its own culture, perspective, or 
bias that can influence how a TRA report is interpreted. These viewpoints 
can influence how the TRA report may be understood or acted upon. 
Anecdotal reports suggest that program managers and technology 
developers have influenced the TRA rating because of other program 
goals, such as budget or schedule pressures, or other expectations. 
Because program managers are rated on their ability to deliver projects 
within certain budget, schedule, or technical expectations, they are at 
increased risk of making unnecessary compromises. For this reason, 
organizations should be vigilant in viewing the TRA reports with 
professional judgment. 
Step 5 – Use the TRA 
Report Findings 
=== page 86 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 81 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
A best practice is that the TRA report should be used for its stated 
purpose, such as to inform decision makers about whether a prescribed 
TRL goal has been met or identify potential areas of concern or risk. TRA 
reports should provide useful information so that decision makers can rely 
on them to identify technology maturity gaps, decide when and how 
technology development efforts should move forward, consider whether 
backup or alternative technology solutions should be considered, and 
obtain information as a source of input for other analyses, such as 
updating a program risk management plan, or revising cost and schedule 
risk assessments. 
The TRA report can also: 
• inform the integrated project team in preparing technology maturation 
plans to achieve an acceptable maturity roadmap for CTs prior to a 
decision point or stage gate; 
• provide a basis for modifying the requirements if technological risks 
are too high; 
• help refine the technology development strategy or similar planning 
document used in the systems engineering process; 
• inform the test and evaluation community about technology maturity 
demonstration needs; 
• help establish technology transition agreements to articulate external 
dependencies on technology base projects and to define the specific 
technologies, technology demonstration events, and exit criteria for 
the technology to transition into the acquisition program; and 
• augment knowledge building and continuous improvement as an 
important part of an evolving TRA process and identify lessons 
learned that benefit future TRAs and/or technology development 
projects that should be identified during the TRA process. 
TRAs are point-in-time evaluations and this should be taken into account 
by decision makers when using their results. That is, TRAs are snapshots 
of how a CT has been demonstrated at a certain point in its development. 
While there is no standard guideline for the shelf life of a TRA rating, 
experts assert that it can range anywhere from 1 to 6 months, depending 
on the type of technology and how rapidly it evolves. 
A best practice is to document lessons learned within the TRA report or 
separately. In the case of a separate lessons learned document, the TRA 
=== page 87 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 82 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
report should be referenced within the document and the document 
should be filed with the TRA report. 
 
At decision points or stage gates, governance bodies use TRA reports to 
evaluate or certify that CTs have reached a prescribed TRL. Governance 
bodies are typically made up of one or more senior or executive-level 
officials, science and technology chiefs, or department heads that review 
the TRA report and other information to decide whether CTs are 
sufficiently mature and the program or project that will integrate them is 
ready to move to the next acquisition phase. Governance bodies review 
the TRA report most commonly before the decision to start system 
development—the point when program requirements should be matched 
to organizational resources—but can also use them at other decision 
points depending on the cost, schedule, or technical risk that may warrant 
their use.50 At DOD, the MDA is the governing official who certifies that a 
technology for use in a Major Defense Acquisition Program has been 
demonstrated in a relevant environment (TRL 6) prior to a Milestone B 
approval.51 GAO recommends that CTs reach TRL 7 at the decision point 
to start system development. In some special cases, such as the space 
environment, it would be impractical to test a technology in its operational 
environment, so TRL 6 can be acceptable. At DOE, the governing official 
reviews the TRA results prior to critical decision (CD) 2—at TRL 6 where 
                                                                                                                       
50A TRA is not a pass/fail exercise and is not intended to provide a value judgment of the 
technology developers, technology development program, or program/project office. It is a 
review process to ensure that CTs reflected in a project design have been demonstrated 
to work as intended (technology readiness) before committing significant organizational 
resources at the next phase of development. 
5110 U.S.C. § 2366b. The law allows the MDA to waive certification and determination 
requirements (one of which is that the technology in the program has been demonstrated 
in a relevant environment) if it determines that such a requirement would hinder the DOD’s 
ability to meet critical national security objectives. Whenever the MDA makes such a 
determination and authorizes such a waiver, the waiver determination, and the reasons for 
the waiver determination have to be submitted in writing to the Congressional defense 
committees within 30 days of waiver authorization. The MDA for an MDAP reaching 
Milestone A after October 1, 2016, is the Service Acquisition Executive (SAE) of the 
Military Department that is managing the program, unless another official is designated to 
serve as the MDA. See, FY16 NDAA, Pub. L. No.114-92, Sec. 825(a)-(c)(2), 129 Stat. 
726, 908 (Nov. 25, 2015) ; DoDI 5000.02, Chg. 3, para 4; and DoD (DCMO) 
Memorandum, Guidance on Department of Defense Implementation of Section 2430(d) of 
Title 10, United States Code, of December 18, 2017. 
TRAs for Governance 
Decisions 
=== page 88 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 83 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
approval for the project baseline occurs.52 At NASA, in recent years, most 
major projects in development reported that they matured their 
technologies to TRL 6 by preliminary design review. 
Figure 12 shows a simplified acquisition or project life-cycle with notional 
decision points to highlight where TRAs may be conducted to govern 
programs. Each organization should determine when and how often 
TRAs for such purposes should be conducted to accommodate its own 
requirements, technology considerations, and risk tolerance. 
Figure 12: Acquisition or Project Life-cycle with Technology Readiness Assessments (TRA) at Decision Points for 
Governance 
 
 
 
Knowledge-building TRA reports are used by technology developers or 
program managers in their day-to-day responsibilities for maturing CTs, 
systems, or sub-systems. These reports are prepared in the interim 
periods between decision points, beginning from the early technology 
development phase—typically where analytical and experimental critical 
function or characteristic proof of concept occurs at TRL 3—through the 
completion of the system and its qualified test and demonstration at TRL 
8. While formal TRA reports are used at key decision points, knowledge-
building TRA reports are used as project self-assessments to make a 
                                                                                                                       
52According to DOE officials, in the next iteration of their guidance, if the total project cost 
for a DOE application exceeds $750 million, or the technology system is determined to be 
a “first-of-a-kind” engineering endeavor, TRL 7 will be recommended to obtain CD-2 
approval; otherwise, TRL 6 is acceptable. Currently the guidance suggests a TRL of 6 at 
CD-2, and projects are encouraged to achieve TRL 7 prior to CD-3 as a recognized best 
practice. 
Knowledge-Building TRA 
Reports for Project 
Management 
=== page 89 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 84 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
broad range of decisions.53 These include (1) learning about specific 
aspects of technology development efforts, such as calculating progress 
in achieving technical performance goals for a specific technology or 
group of technologies; (2) gathering evidence either to continue 
development efforts or to initiate steps toward using an alternative or 
backup technology; (3) demonstrating the performance of fieldable 
technologies or prototypes; (4) making decisions about transitioning 
technologies to new or existing acquisition programs; or (5) deciding 
whether CTs are ready for TRAs for governance bodies at a decision 
point.54 
 
TRA reports are used to illuminate potential areas of concern or risk. 
They facilitate discussions between the program manager and customers 
on how to mitigate potential risks at the various phases of development. 
When done before the program initiation phase, TRA reports can 
complement the pursuit of risk reduction efforts to ensure technologies 
are adequately mature by the time they reach key decision points. 
Knowledge-building TRAs may be conducted during the technology 
development phase to support developmental efforts, including risk 
reduction efforts. For example, technology developers and program 
managers may use information gathered via knowledge-building TRAs to 
determine whether technologies are ready to undergo an official TRA for 
governance purposes. Organizations should not ignore or dismiss the 
risks discovered as part of the TRA or proceed with optimism without 
addressing maturity concerns. 
                                                                                                                       
53Self-assessments or peer reviews are used in some agencies to accomplish interim 
assessments. During these reviews, the technology development and testing results are 
evaluated against the TMP to assess the overall progress of technology maturation. 
Identified issues are documented and tracked to closure throughout the various phases of 
the project. 
54The TRA report and other analyses are documented and reviewed to determine the 
validity of the approach that best meets a project’s goals and its physical, functional, 
performance, and operational requirements at the best value and include testing and 
validation of all required functions, including safety. A team consisting of members from 
the customer, engineering, operations, maintenance organizations, technology 
development, program management, and selected subject matter experts reviews the 
documented assessments and study results. The team review focuses on the results of 
the assessments and studies relative to the alternatives considered, evaluation of systems 
used to select the recommended design approach, and the potential life-cycle cost 
savings. The purpose is to review the documented assessment and study evidence to 
identify the basis for endorsing the selected design approach, including the development 
and testing of the technology to ensure its maturation in subsequent project phases. 
TRAs and Risk Reduction 
Efforts 
=== page 90 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 85 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
TRA reports themselves do not eliminate technology risk, nor do they 
preclude taking risks. But they do alert decision makers and other 
stakeholders who are interested to potential areas that could be 
problematic and inform future actions. The TRA report should clearly 
state the TRL rating for each CT, at a minimum, and include the basis for 
the decisions made. Decision makers can use this information to identify 
gaps between the expected TRL and the actual TRL. Aware of potential 
concerns, organizations may further investigate and analyze any 
concerns raised in order to better understand the potential risks, 
challenges to development, and potential cost and schedule implications. 
When certain CTs are assessed as immature or as not progressing as 
planned, a best practice is to use the TRA report information as basis to: 
• consider or identify an alternate or backup technology; 
• initiate development of a TMP, a project management tool that is used 
to address immature CTs (see the next chapter in this guide for more 
information on this tool);55 
• update the program’s risk management plan by ensuring that all 
potential CTs are included in the program’s risk management 
database and plan; and 
• update or revise cost and schedule risk assessments, as appropriate. 
It is important for program managers and technology developers to 
understand that CTs rated at a lower TRL than expected necessitate the 
development of a plan for maturing these technologies, among other 
options. What is unacceptable is to discover immaturity and then proceed 
with the assumption that maturity of the CT will just happen as planned 
and as scheduled. 
As decision makers use the TRA report to plan how technology 
development efforts should proceed, maturing the CT from one level to 
the next may take varying amounts of effort, depending on the CT and the 
readiness level. Indeed, the amount of time, effort, and activities needed 
to advance the technology to a higher TRL may not only differ largely 
between TRLs but also may not increase linearly between progressively 
                                                                                                                       
55Organizations employ similar methods to mitigate technology risks as part of their own 
systems engineering or program management processes, such as those used by DOD 
and NASA. The TMP is not a replacement for those methods. Rather, it is a planning tool 
intended to help technology developers and program managers bring immature critical 
technologies to a target TRL. 
Options for Addressing 
Immature Critical 
Technologies 
=== page 91 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 86 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
higher TRLs. For example, moving a technology from a TRL 3 to a TRL 4 
may not require the same amount of effort as moving the same 
technology from a TRL 6 to a TRL 7. While TRAs may determine the 
maturity of a technology, they do not in and of themselves inform the 
technology developer or program manager of what is required to 
successfully complete its development. 
 
Organizations may combine the TRA report with other project 
management tools to help them better understand risk and decide how to 
effectively manage and develop CTs. For example, DOD employs a 
systems engineering process that specifies analytical methods to help 
program managers and technology developers in their development 
efforts. TRA experts have also developed other analytical tools that are 
designed to work specifically with TRAs to assist program managers and 
technology developers in maturing technologies. Table 5 lists some of the 
more commonly known project management tools that can be used in 
combination with TRAs. 
Table 5: Examples of Program Management Tools and Analytical Approaches Used with Technology Readiness Assessments 
(TRAs) 
Name Description Purpose 
Advancement Degree of Difficulty 
(AD2) 
A predictive method that provides 
information on what is required to 
move from one Technology 
Readiness Level (TRL) to another.  
Provides technology developers, program managers, and 
others with risk information in the form of likelihood of 
occurrence of an adverse event and impact cost to ensure 
that such an event does not occur and the time required to 
implement the necessary action. 
(https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a507591.pdf) 
Risk assessment matrix A process used for understanding 
the nature, sources, and causes of 
identified risks for estimating risk 
levels; and for studying impacts and 
consequences. 
Helps technology developers, program managers, and 
others to compare risk analysis results with risk criteria in 
order to determine whether a specified risk level is 
acceptable or tolerable. 
(http://acqnotes.com/acqnote/tasks/risk-reporting-matrix) 
Risk Identification, Integration & 
Illities (RI3) 
An Air Force method of identifying 
frequent risks beyond technology 
development from “lessons learned” 
and “best practices” in case studies 
and Air Force development team 
experience. 
Helps technology developers and program managers 
identify common risks from questions in nine areas: design 
maturity and stability; scalability and complexity; 
integrability; testability; software; reliability; maintainability; 
human factors; and people, organizations, and skills. 
(https://www.dau.edu/cop/log/Pages/Search.aspx?k=Risk 
Identification) 
Relationship between TRA 
Reports and Other Project 
Management Tools 
=== page 92 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 87 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Name Description Purpose 
Systems and software 
engineering framework and 
common process framework 
A companion standard that provides 
detailed definition, requirements, and 
evaluation criteria for the technical 
reviews and audits associated with 
DOD acquisition projects. 
Provides program managers and acquisition officials with 
the definitions, requirements, and evaluation criteria for 
conducting technical reviews and audits associated with 
DOD acquisition projects. DOD has adopted the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 15288.2, “IEEE 
Standard for Technical Reviews and Audits on Defense 
Programs” for describing the life-cycle of man-made 
systems and defines a set of Systems Engineering 
processes and associated terminology typical for the full 
system life-cycle, including conception, development, 
production, utilization, support, and retirement. A 
forthcoming revision to Chapter 4 of the Defense 
Acquisition Guidebook will refer to the IEEE standard 
rather than to the systems engineering technical review 
checklists. (https://www.acq.osd.mil/se/docs/15288-Guide-
2017.pdf) 
Technology Program 
Management Model (TPMM) 
A systems engineering approach to 
managing early technology 
development efforts. Developed in 
2006 by the Army Space and Missile 
Defense Command, the tool evolved 
in partnership with the Defense 
Acquisition University, and was later 
sponsored and further developed in 
2009 by the Defense Threat 
Reduction Agency. 
Helps technology developers plan and measure a 
program’s development maturity; promotes early focus on 
transitioning technology; acts as a yardstick by providing 
criteria for evaluating the technology development strategy 
earlier.  
Source: Compilation of organization documents. | GAO-20-48G 
 
A best practices checklist that includes the corresponding high-quality 
characteristics related to using the TRA report findings is included below. 
• The TRA report is used for its stated purpose, such as to inform 
decision makers about whether a prescribed TRL goal has been met, 
identify potential areas of concern or risk, or other. (Useful) 
• For CTs assessed as immature and which did not meet the TRL goal: 
(Useful) 
• an alternate or backup technology is identified, 
• a technology maturation plan is developed, 
• the program’s risk management plan is updated, and 
• the cost and schedule risk assessments are revised or updated. 
• TRA reports used for governance purposes are prepared and 
submitted in advance of a decision point or stage gate so the 
information is timely and can be acted upon. (Useful) 
• The TRA report documents lessons learned. (Reliable)  
Best Practice Checklist: Using 
the TRA Report Findings 
=== page 93 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 88 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The technology maturation plan (TMP) is a management planning tool to 
mature CTs that have been assessed as immature. The purpose of the 
TMP is to develop a plan to mature CTs to an acceptable TRL. The TMP 
lays out the steps, actions, and resources needed to mature CTs and 
uses the TRA report findings and other key information to establish a road 
map with the necessary engineering activities to mature the CTs. It 
provides an accurate gauge of the overall progress for maturing 
technology. The TMP also serves as a key reference document at a 
decision point or stage gate to verify that progress has been made in 
closing the maturity gaps. 
There are a number of steps involved in preparing the TMP, including 
collecting information for planning and evaluation, determining high-level 
cost and schedule risk, and developing risk handling strategies to provide 
program managers with a road map to mature the CTs.56 CTs may 
change during development, and technology maturation test results may 
drive significant design changes. As a result, the TMP is a “living” 
document that is modified periodically as knowledge increases and as 
cost and schedule evolve with the maturity of CTs. 
Program managers should mature CTs before system development 
begins. TMPs can be a standalone source of information or part of a 
broader set of documents, such as a project execution plan or technology 
development strategy. 
 
The TMP consists of five steps to mature CTs. The execution of these 
steps is commonly led by the program manager, who typically designates 
a planning lead with the knowledge to perform and facilitate the 
necessary work to develop the TMP. Figure 13 describes the five steps. 
Organizations may tailor them to accommodate their own structures, 
processes, and policies. 
  
                                                                                                                       
56Agencies employ similar methods to mitigate technology risks as part of their own 
systems engineering or program management processes, such as those DOD and NASA 
use. The TMP is not a replacement for those methods but is a planning tool specifically 
designed to help technology developers and program managers bring immature critical 
technologies to a designated or acceptable TRL. 
Technology 
Maturation Plans 
Five Steps for Preparing 
the TMP 
=== page 94 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 89 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 13: Five Steps to Prepare a Technology Maturation Plan (TMP) 
 
 
The program manager acknowledges the immature CTs cited by the TRA 
report and designates a planning lead to prepare the TMP. The program 
manager requires a TMP be prepared for the selected CTs. These CTs 
typically have a technology maturity gap. However, other technologies 
known to have challenges during development may also be selected. For 
example, a program manager may want a TMP prepared for technologies 
that pose greater risk due to their complexity or technologies for which 
there may be no baseline or history to draw observations on past 
performance. 
The program manager conducts initial research and data collection 
activities and then designates a lead to complete the TMP. Additional 
personnel may be provided to support the effort, such as engineering 
staff, contractor personnel, or subject matter experts, as needed. Initial 
research and data collection efforts start with the completed TRA report, 
and data collection and research efforts are conducted for each immature 
CT. The data collection activities include but are not limited to obtaining 
the current TRL rating for each CT from the TRA report and gathering 
additional reports, analyses, and test data, if applicable. In addition, the 
program manager or lead facilitates an assessment of the cost, schedule, 
and technical risks for achieving the desired TRL for CTs. For this step, 
the planning lead may be from the program management team or 
engineering team but should coordinate with others to assist as needed. 
Step 1 
Step 2 
=== page 95 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 90 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The planning lead drafts and documents the TMP.57 The TMP should 
include the approach for defining the technology development activities, 
scoping the effort, and identifying the steps for bringing CTs to the 
desired maturity. In general, the required technology development 
activities and specific maturation plans are prepared for each CT 
identified by the program manager or engineering expert in Step 1. The 
lead recruits others as necessary to help develop the approach, activities, 
and steps for the TMP. 
The designated lead presents the TMP to the program manager and chief 
engineer for review and approval. Once approved, the TMP may be 
provided to other key stakeholders, such as technology developers, 
governance bodies, or other organizations that have a vested interest in 
the development of the CT. Depending on their role and responsibilities, 
they may act as a source to verify the TMP’s responsiveness to 
technology maturity gaps identified in the TRA and the reasonableness of 
the proposed approach, schedule, costs, and technology risks associated 
with technology maturation requirements. Once comments are resolved, 
the program manager proceeds to the next step.58 For example, the initial 
TMP is documented and approved and serves as a baseline for guiding 
the work. The TMP is maintained within the appropriate organization for 
future reference and updates. 
The program manager ensures that the steps and activities needed to 
mature each technology outlined in the TMP are communicated and 
implemented by the appropriate personnel throughout the organization. 
The technology developers or project managers are generally responsible 
for implementing the activities. 
 
The TMP is a “living” document that should be updated as progress is 
made, new information comes to light, or conditions that materially affect 
the plan occur. The program manager or designated lead is responsible 
for monitoring, tracking, and making adjustments to the TMP as 
necessary. If a subsequent TRA triggers an update to the TMP, the 
program manager establishes a schedule to ensure the update and its 
                                                                                                                       
57The TMP lead may coordinate with others as needed when drafting and putting the TMP 
together. The sections that follow contain additional guidance in documenting a plan to 
mature the technologies, including the TMP template. 
58The approval process of the TMP is carried out as defined in existing project plans, 
quality assurance plans, or change control and configuration plans, as applicable. 
Step 3 
Step 4 
Step 5 
TMP Updates 
=== page 96 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 91 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
completion before the next TRA. The updated TMP serves as a source 
document as part of a TRA for the assessment team. The five steps in 
figure 13 may be tailored to include steps for updating the TMP. 
The TMP has three sections that document information to mature CTs. 
These sections are intended to document: (1) past TRAs and the most 
current TRLs; (2) a plan to mature technologies; and (3) a plan to mature 
the integration of CTs and technology elements that constitute the 
system. 
Section 1 of the TMP called Technology Assessments of the Project is a 
review of past technical assessments and any previous assessments that 
have contributed to the need for the TMP, including previous technology 
development activities that brought the technology to its current state of 
readiness. A list of the current TRLs for each CT is also included in this 
section. 
Section 2 of the TMP called Technology Maturation Plan describes the 
approach, steps, and activities for maturing technologies, including the 
consideration of alternative technologies. Items that should be accounted 
for include: 
• the criticality of the system to mission success or safety; 
• the probability or likelihood that the technology will be successful; 
• the cost, schedule, and performance penalty incurred if an alternate 
solution is used (agencies generally include this as part of their risk 
assessments and document them in the project Risk Register); 
• the high-level cost estimate of the development strategy; and 
• the effects of the strategy on other technical portions of the project. 
All of the identified technology gaps and technical assumptions that 
require resolution or validation should be assessed for impact to the 
overall system design. The elements that require significant redesign, if 
shown to not perform as expected, are addressed early in the technology 
maturation process. This allows implementation of alternative approaches 
and other backup strategies. By including alternative technology solutions 
in TMPs, program managers can consider these alternatives if efforts to 
reach certain TRL goals prove more challenging than expected. For 
example, if CTs become too resource intensive or fall too far behind 
schedule, program managers can consider backup solutions, such as 
investment trade-offs or the pursuit of backup technologies. Case study 7 
highlights the importance of establishing plans for backup technologies to 
Sections of a Technology 
Maturation Plan 
=== page 97 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 92 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
keep a project on schedule. Advance planning can help program 
managers respond to unanticipated challenges without compromising 
performance goals. 
Case Study 7: Identifying Alternative Critical Technologies, an Example from 
DOD, cited in GAO-08-467SP 
In 2008, GAO reported that none of the Navy’s P-8A Multi-mission Maritime Aircraft’s 
initial four critical technologies were mature when it entered development. The P-8A 
program identified mature backup technologies for each of the four, which according 
to program officials, would still allow the P-8A to meet minimum requirements. The P-
8A program updated all four critical technologies identified at the program’s start in 
2004 in response to a 2006 TRA that found these technologies immature. It 
effectively mitigated risk by refocusing efforts on critical technologies that, it was 
believed, would better achieve program requirements. Further, the P-8A was to 
undergo structural modifications while on the production line in order to reduce time 
and cost. While the program experienced a $1.2 billion contract cost increase and the 
contractors estimated a 7-14 month delay for the build and delivery dates, it was not 
possible to predict the effect of a cost overrun had the program maintained the 
original critical technologies. However, the TRA is likely to have identified risks in time 
to inform future program decisions and minimize cost and schedule effects. 
Source: U.S. Navy. | GAO-08-467SP 
 
GAO, Defense Acquisitions: Assessments of Selected Weapon Programs, 
GAO-08-467SP (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 21, 2008). 

=== page 98 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 93 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
In preparing plans to mature each CT, programs should identify: 
• the key technologies being addressed; 
• the objectives of the technology development; 
• the technology development approach; 
• the scope, including; 
• specific tasks to be undertaken and 
• results needed for a claimed advancement to a higher TRL 
• the responsible organization for the maturation activities; 
• the TRL goals for each major milestone; 
• the TRLs to be reached as the project or program progresses through 
turnover, readiness assessments, startup, and initial operations; 
• the cost, schedule, milestones, and risks of these activities; 
• technology alternatives; and 
• the off-ramps that will be taken if results are less than required at 
each critical decision milestone. 
Developing plans to mature CTs helps program managers and 
technology developers mitigate cost, schedule, and technical risks. Many 
program officers assume that technologies will mature on schedule and 
meet program requirements. This may obscure program risks and can 
have significant negative consequences to the overall program.  
Section 3 of the TMP called Technology Maturity Schedule, and 
Summary Technology Maturity Budget describes the plan to mature the 
technologies with the integration of the CTs, including an analysis of the 
maturity gaps. This section should include a high-level schedule and 
budget, including the total maturation costs for the major development 
activities for each CT. Major decision points, such as proceeding with or 
abandoning the current technology or selecting a backup technology, 
should be identified in this section. Figure 14 shows the TMP template 
with the detailed elements to include in the plan, along with a description 
of each element. 
=== page 99 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 94 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 14: Technology Maturation Plan (TMP) Template 
 
 

=== page 100 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 95 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Figure 14: Technology Maturation Plan (TMP) Template (continued) 
 

=== page 101 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 96 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Organizations can tailor the TMP to accommodate their own terms, 
definitions, and processes. 
A best practices checklist for preparing the TMP is included below. 
• The program manager appoints a lead planner with the knowledge, 
and experience to develop a credible TMP. 
• The TMP includes the following elements: 
• a roadmap with detailed plans, steps, and actions for each CT; 
• associated risks (cost, schedule, and technical) for reaching the 
desired TRL for each CT, including the identification of back up 
technologies, as appropriate; 
• a high-level schedule and budget to mature each CT; and 
• program manager and chief engineer review and approval. 
• The TRA report, analyses, and other credible information is used to 
support the TMP. 
• The TMP is periodically updated. 
  
Best Practice Checklist: 
Technology Maturity Plans 
=== page 102 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 97 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Historically, the TRL scale has not always been understood in terms of 
what needs to be demonstrated for software at each of the nine TRLs 
because software development may not start until later in the acquisition 
life-cycle than hardware-related efforts. However, knowledge has 
increased over the last decade on how to better manage software 
development by placing greater emphasis on the use of prototypes, 
among other risk reduction practices.59 
While some experts have noted that certain assessment tools are not well 
suited to evaluate software development efforts, new assessment tools or 
variations of existing ones are being used to do TRAs on software 
projects. This chapter briefly describes the current state of practice for 
evaluating the maturity of software technologies with a goal of creating 
awareness and opportunities for advancing knowledge. Appendix IV 
includes TRLs that describe software readiness levels. 
 
Software has unique characteristics that make it inherently challenging to 
evaluate in contrast to hardware systems. For example, software is 
intangible whereas hardware has physical properties that can be more 
easily characterized, measured, monitored, and tested. Therefore, the 
data and information used to measure, monitor, manage, and control 
software is fundamentally different. 
In general, project management challenges can be offset by early 
planning efforts and involving subject matter experts in the TRA process, 
especially when it comes to software. Experts noted that if technology 
developers and program managers do not take the appropriate actions 
upfront, such as involving software engineers earlier in the acquisition life-
cycle, then projects are likely to encounter problems. Examples of 
technical and program management challenges that could potentially 
hamper software development efforts include 
• Software is not routinely considered in planning, so it is often not 
identified early. 
                                                                                                                       
59Guidance for software TRL definitions is in DDR&E, U.S. Department of Defense, 
Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) Deskbook (Washington, D.C.: July 2009), app. 
H. See also appendix VI of this guidance for software TRLs. 
TRAs and Software 
Development 
Application of TRAs to 
Software Systems 
=== page 103 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 98 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
• A lack of distinction between software types (newly developed 
software, reused software, and commercial-off-the-shelf software) can 
obscure whether a software technology is critical. 
• Definitions are inconsistent as to what identifies new software 
technology as a CT. Reused software code or modified commercial 
off the shelf software, for example, can be applied in different 
applications or platforms that essentially make them new or novel. 
• Guidance is lacking for handling technologies that are started in one 
increment of software but finished in a later increment. 
Such challenges can be overcome with knowledge, clearly articulated 
guidance, and subject matter experts with the appropriate expertise, 
skills, and experience. Experts who helped develop this Guide assert that 
the following questions could help facilitate improvement in the practice of 
assessing the software maturity. 
• How well defined is the intended application? (This determines how 
well a problem has been thought through and whether the application 
of software is defined or ad hoc.) This can identify the difference 
between what the software does and what it is expected to do. 
• Have artifacts upon which to base decisions about maturity of 
development been identified and collected as a universal practice 
when evaluating software? 
• Have software methodologies been documented? Are the acquisition 
life-cycle needs included in the software development plan? 
• Has a structured or a disciplined process been followed? 
• Have the effects of Agile software development methodologies been 
considered? Have the artifacts produced relative to the acquisition 
life-cycle been identified? For example, a traditional preliminary 
design review may not be feasible for organizations using Agile 
software development methodologies. In such cases, what body of 
evidence is sufficient to demonstrate progression has been made at 
these reviews? 
• Does the TRA team include a software engineer to ensure that the 
right skills, experience, and knowledge are available to evaluate 
software maturity? 
 
=== page 104 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 99 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
During development of this Guide, knowledge and information about 
TRAs when it comes to software-only technologies were evolving. 
According to experts, this is largely because embedded software maturity 
can be judged through hardware demonstrations using existing TRL 
concepts and definitions, whereas evaluations for software-only systems 
lack physical properties for observation. In addition, for software-
embedded systems in which code is installed in the hardware, the 
interfaces are relatively constrained by what the hardware can do or is 
expected to do. In such cases, the bounds in developing the code are 
known and the sufficiency of the interfaces may be better assessed. 
Software-only technologies where software “is” the standalone system 
and there is no hardware component may require more complicated, 
shorter acquisition life-cycle processes in contrast to embedded software 
systems that have specific requirements imposed by hardware 
constraints. In the software-only domain, methodologies typically involve 
iterative development, with a need to be more flexible, and involve early 
planning and incremental testing. 
Given the complexity of software, opportunities exist to increase 
knowledge for improving the current state of practice with software 
systems or technologies. According to experts, better descriptions of the 
kinds of supporting evidence needed to demonstrate certain levels of 
maturity could improve the practice. While organizations continue to learn 
about how best to evaluate CTs when dealing with software, we believe 
that identifying and documenting lessons learned, establishing best 
practices, and sharing knowledge through communities of practice will 
improve TRAs on software development projects. 
In addition, experts identified two key practices for conducting TRAs on 
software technologies as (1) including a software engineer on the TRA 
team with the requisite skills, experience, and knowledge to assess the 
software, and (2) ensuring that the appropriate types of evidence are 
identified as demonstration criteria for reaching a defined maturity level. 
  
Software Embedded 
Technologies versus 
Software-only 
Technologies 
=== page 105 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 100 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Applying TRA methods for evaluating the integration of technologies into 
a system or the readiness of larger systems or systems-of-systems has 
long been an area of interest among the systems engineering community, 
as well as within the TRA expert community. Many experts believe that 
the integration of CTs into such systems is captured in the readiness 
levels of the TRL scale where a technology should be demonstrated in a 
system in its proposed operational environment. However, practitioners 
have expressed concern about using the results of TRAs performed on a 
few technologies to determine the readiness of systems with numerous 
technologies, components, and integrations. Experts realize that 
additional system-level measures are needed to advance knowledge and 
evaluate the readiness of today’s complex systems. 
Presented in 2006 by the Systems Development and Maturity Laboratory 
at Stevens Institute of Technology, the system readiness level (SRL) was 
designed to give a holistic picture of the readiness of complex systems by 
characterizing the effect of technology and integration maturity on a 
systems engineering effort. The method was proposed because TRLs 
measure the maturity of an individual technology but do not provide 
insight into integration between technologies or the maturity of the whole 
system. The SRL incorporates the current TRL scale and introduces an 
integration readiness level (IRL) to calculate the SRL.60, 61 Considerable 
work has been done over the last several years to enhance and improve 
the original SRL methodology creating what is hoped will be an emerging 
systems engineering best practice, the Systems Readiness Assessment 
(SRA) methodology. This methodology is captured in detail and 
documented in the SRA Engineering Handbook.62 
                                                                                                                       
60An SRL measures the readiness of the whole system or all of the components of the 
system integrated together. The measure is designed to give a holistic picture of the 
readiness of complex systems by characterizing the effect of technology and integration 
maturity on a systems engineering effort. The concept of the SRL incorporates the TRL 
scale and introduces the IRL to calculate the SRL. There are nine levels that range from a 
SRL 1 where the system alternative materiel solutions should have been considered to 
SRL 9 where the system has achieved initial operational capability and can satisfy mission 
objectives. 
61Sauser, Brian J. and Ramirez-Marquez, Jose E., Development of Systems Engineering 
Maturity Models and Management Tools, Final Technical Report 2011-TR-014 (Hoboken, 
N.J.: Systems Engineering Research Center, January 21, 2011). 
62System Readiness Assessment (SRA) Engineering Handbook, International Systems 
Readiness Assessment (SRA) Community Of Interest (ISRACOI), October 2017. 
Development of 
System-level 
Readiness Measures 
=== page 106 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 101 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Similar to TRLs, the IRL is defined as a series of levels that articulate the 
key maturation milestones for integration activities. Introducing an IRL to 
an assessment provides not only a check as to where a technology is on 
an integration readiness scale but also a direction for improving 
integration with other technologies. Just as the TRL is used to assess the 
risk associated with developing technologies, the IRL is designed to 
assess the risk associated with integrating these technologies. The 
readiness of each technology of the system and all of its integrations are 
then mathematically combined, resulting in a system-level readiness 
measure, the SRL. The methodology can be adapted for use in an array 
of system engineering development efforts and can also be applied as a 
tool for technology insertion trade studies and analysis. As with 
knowledge-building TRAs, performing multiple SRAs over the life-cycle 
can identify potential problem areas and help to reduce program risk. 
A SRA user environment tool has been developed and deployed that 
provides an interactive environment to model a system’s architecture and 
integrations and calculate the system’s readiness. The user environment 
allows for the visualization and monitoring of a system’s development 
progress and its associated readiness over time. Tools have also been 
developed using Bayesian network models to provide a mathematically 
consistent method for validating both the TRL and IRL, increasing the 
confidence in the determination of the readiness of system components 
and their technologies.63, 64 The SRA user environment and the TRL and 
IRL Bayesian network models have all been open sourced and are 
publicly available. Appendix V lists other types of readiness levels for 
evaluating the integration of technologies. 
While the SRA methodology has been implemented successfully on 
several development programs, the methodology does not have as an 
extensive history of use and application as does the TRA. A number of 
experts who helped develop this Guide have formed the International 
Systems Readiness Assessment Community of Interest (ISRACOI), a 
worldwide collaborative community of individuals from industry, academic, 
                                                                                                                       
63Austin, Marc F., Homberger, Cheyne, Ahalt, Virginia, Doolittle, Erin, Polacek , George, 
York, Donald M., Applying Bayesian Networks to TRL Assessments – Innovation in 
Systems Engineering, (presented at the 27th Annual INCOSE International Symposium, 
Adelaide, Australia, July 15-20, 2017). 
64Austin, Marc F., Ahalt, Virginia, Doolittle, Erin, Homberger, Cheyne, Polacek ,George A, 
York, Donald M., Mitigating Integration Risks in Complex Systems,” (presented at the 28th 
Annual INCOSE International Symposium, Washington DC, July 7-12, 2018). 
=== page 107 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 102 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
and government who have an interest in integration planning and 
measurement, system readiness measures, and reducing program risk 
through comprehensive system thinking. A key goal of ISRACOI is to 
create and maintain a collaborative virtual space populated with systems 
readiness information, recent research, papers, and presentations. 
Another goal is to share, disseminate, and maintain relevant artifacts, 
such as the Systems Readiness Assessment Handbook, the SRA user 
environment, and the TRL and IRL Bayesnet tools. For more information 
about ISRACOI and key initiatives, go to http://www.ISRACOI.org. 
  
=== page 108 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 103 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Critical technology (CT) - is a new or novel technology, or technology 
being used in a new or novel way, that is needed for a system to meet its 
operational performance requirements within defined cost and schedule 
parameters. 
Governance body - an individual or group of individuals charged with 
program oversight in managing and allocating fiscal resources as the 
gatekeeper for the organization. 
Heritage technologies - technologies that have been used successfully in 
operation. Such technologies may be used in new ways where the form, 
fit or function is changed; the environment to which it will be exposed in 
its new application is different than those for which it was originally 
qualified, or process changes have been made in its manufacture.  
Knowledge-building TRA - a tailored self-assessment intended for a 
narrower audience, such as the program manager, or technology 
developer where the focus of the TRA may be to gauge progress toward 
achieving a certain technology maturity goal, evaluate technology 
maturity, or identify and manage risk. Systems engineers may use them 
to understand the risks before integrating technologies into new or 
existing acquisition programs.  
Major decision point - used to describe a point in an acquisition project or 
plan at which development can be examined and any important changes 
or decisions relating to costs, resources, profits, etc. can be made. In 
private industry, not for profit, and other sectors these points may be 
referred to as “stage gates.” 
Operational environment - an environment that addresses all the 
operational requirements and specifications required of the final system to 
include platform/packaging. 
Relevant environment - a test environment that simulates both the most 
important and most stressing aspects of the operational environment. 
Simulated environment - a device, computer program, or system that 
performs a simulation of an environmental model. The simulated 
environment is used to test CTs and evaluate their function and operation 
in a technology’s demonstrated readiness. 
Glossary 
=== page 109 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 104 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Technical baseline description - a document that describes the program 
or project’s purpose, system, performance characteristics, and system 
configuration. 
Technology readiness assessment (TRA) - a systematic, evidence-based 
process that evaluates the maturity of CTs (hardware, software, 
processes, or a combination thereof) that are vital to the performance of a 
larger system or the fulfillment of the key objectives of an acquisition 
program. 
Technology maturity assessment strategy - a best practice approach for 
large acquisition programs where multiple TRAs and other assessments 
are identified in a program’s overall acquisition strategy plan.  
Technology maturation plan (TMP) - a management planning tool that 
lays out the steps, actions, and resources needed to mature CTs that 
have been assessed as less mature than desired or are lagging in 
maturity compared to other CTs. 
Technology readiness levels (TRL) - a scale that consists of nine levels 
ranging from one through nine—each one requiring the technology to be 
demonstrated in incrementally higher levels of fidelity in terms of its form, 
the level of integration with other parts of the system, and its operating 
environment than the previous, until at the final level the technology is 
described in terms of actual system performance in an operational 
environment. The scale is ordered according to the characteristics of the 
demonstration or testing environment under which a given technology 
was tested at defined points in time. 
=== page 110 ===
 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
 
 
 
 
Page 105 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
To ascertain generally accepted best practices for conducting high-quality 
TRAs of technologies, we conducted knowledge sharing meetings with 
practitioners and technology experts from across the federal government, 
commercial industry, nonprofits, and academia. We conducted periodic 
in-person meetings at our headquarters building in Washington D.C., as 
well as virtual meetings with a community of over 180 experts where we 
collected information, facilitated focus groups, and elicited feedback on 
iterative drafts of the Guide’s chapters. To ensure the Guide reflected a 
broad range of knowledge and viewpoints in order to identify useful 
information to more effectively mature critical technologies, determine 
critical technology readiness and address risk, we consulted experts from 
the science and technology, systems engineering, nuclear engineering, 
software and computer sciences, risk management, and acquisition policy 
and program management disciplines. We released a public exposure 
draft of the GAO Technology Readiness Assessment Guide 
(GAO-16-410G) in August 2016 for a 12-month comment period. 
From August 2017 to June 2019, we assembled a GAO expert panel 
made up of representatives from the Applied Research and Methods; 
Contracting and National Security Acquisitions; Information Technology 
and Cybersecurity; Natural Resources and Environment; and Science, 
Technology Assessment, and Analytics mission teams to adjudicate over 
400 comments that we received during the public comment period. To 
update the exposure draft of the Guide, the GAO expert panel vetted 
each comment and placed it in one of two categories—as actionable 
where the comment could be further adjudicated, or as not actionable 
because the comment was either not in alignment with the broader 
opinion of the expert community, outside the Guide’s scope, factually 
incorrect, or provided no basis in which an actionable response could be 
taken. For each actionable comment, we documented the GAO expert 
panel decisions on how each was addressed in the Guide. 
We conducted our work from January 2013 to December 2019 in 
accordance with all sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework that 
are relevant to our objectives. The framework requires that we plan and 
perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to 
meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work. We 
believe that the information and data obtained, and the synthesis of 
information conducted, provide a reasonable basis for the guidance in this 
product. 
Appendix I: Objectives, Scope, and 
Methodology 
=== page 111 ===
 
Appendix II: Key Questions to Assess How 
Well Programs Followed the Five Step Process 
for Conducting a TRA 
 
 
 
 
Page 106 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Following best practices helps ensure that the TRA reflects all of the high-
quality characteristics of credibility, objectivity, reliability, and usefulness. 
We have identified five steps that, when followed correctly, should result 
in TRAs that governance bodies or program managers or technology 
developers can use for making informed decisions. 
The following questions correlate to the best practice checklists from the 
Guide’s five steps of conducting a high-quality TRA. These questions can 
be used by auditors or other independent entities that may be internal or 
external to an organization to evaluate the extent to which the best 
practices have been met. 
1.1 Does the TRA plan have a comprehensive assessment approach that 
includes the following? 
1. Is the purpose and scope clearly defined? 
2. Are the resources, schedule, funding, and personnel needed to 
conduct the TRA identified? 
3. Are the CT definition and TRL definitions identified? 
4. Are the evaluation criteria to be used for assessing test results 
defined? Does it describe the types of evidence that will be 
collected to perform the assessment? Who will write the TRA 
report? 
5. Is there a written study plan to help each TRA member prepare for 
conducting the assessment? 
6. Is there a plan for handling dissenting views? 
1.2 Does the TRA plan identify the recipient(s) of the report, such as a 
program manager, systems engineer, or a governance body supporting 
an upcoming decision point, stage gate, or go/no-go decision? 
1.3 Does the TRA plan identify the expertise needed to conduct the 
assessment, and other characteristics of the TRA team, such as 
1. Is the composition of the expertise, knowledge, and experience 
needed to conduct the TRA clearly written to guide the selection of 
the TRA team members? 
2. Is the TRA team defined and properly sized to conduct the 
assessment? What was the basis for the sizing the TRA team? 
Appendix II: Key Questions to Assess How 
Well Programs Followed the Five Step 
Process for Conducting a TRA 
Step 1 –Prepare the TRA Plan, 
and Select the TRA Team 
=== page 112 ===
 
Appendix II: Key Questions to Assess How 
Well Programs Followed the Five Step Process 
for Conducting a TRA 
 
 
 
 
Page 107 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
3. Are the TRA team members experienced in conducting TRAs? 
For those team members with TRA experience, what are those 
experiences, qualifications, certifications, and training? 
4. Are the TRA team member profiles documented and do they 
include signed statements of independence? 
5. Did the TRA team have access to or discuss the need for 
additional subject matter experts from a variety of disciplines as 
needed or determined by the team? If so, who were those experts 
and in which disciplines were they experienced? 
1.4 Are members of the TRA team independent and objective? Have they 
signed statements of independence? 
1.5 Did the TRA team review the initial TRA plan to ensure it included all 
the essential information? 
1.6 Has the TRA team been allocated adequate time and resources to 
execute the TRA plan? 
1.7 Has the appropriate information been obtained and documented to 
conduct the TRA, such as the program master schedule, budget 
documents, test plans, and a technical baseline description of the 
program’s purpose, system, performance characteristics, and system 
configuration? 
1.8 Is the level of detail in the TRA commensurate with the level of detail 
available for the program? 
2.1 In selecting CTs, was a reliable, disciplined, and repeatable process 
followed and documented? 
2.2 In selecting CTs, was the decision based on consideration of the 
newness or novelty of technologies and how they will be used?  
2.3 In selecting CTs, was the selection based on consideration of the 
operational performance requirements and potential cost and schedule 
drivers? 
2.4 For each CT is the relevant environment derived based on those 
aspects of the operational environment determined to be a risk for the 
successful operation of the technology? 
Step 2 – Select the Critical 
Technologies 
=== page 113 ===
 
Appendix II: Key Questions to Assess How 
Well Programs Followed the Five Step Process 
for Conducting a TRA 
 
 
 
 
Page 108 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
2.5 Did the selection of CTs consider the potential adverse interactions 
with system interfaces? 
2.6 Is the number of CTs selected for assessment based on solid analysis 
using the WBS, technical baseline description, process flow diagram, or 
other key program documents? 
2.7 Is the selection of CTs confirmed using more specific questions and 
requirements that pertain to the platform, program, or system in which 
they will operate, refined and confirmed by the TRA team and others, as 
appropriate? 
2.8 Are CTs selected during early development? 
2.9 Are CTs defined at a testable level, including any software needed to 
demonstrate the functionality? 
2.10 Did the TRA team document the reasons why technologies were 
selected as critical and why other technologies were not selected? 
3.1 Did the TRA team confirm that the TRL measure and definitions 
selected during the TRA planning phase was appropriate? Did the TRA 
team reach agreement with the program manager on the kinds of 
evidence that would be needed to demonstrate that a TRA goal or 
objective has been met? 
3.2 Did the TRA team interview the testing officials and verify that the test 
article and the relevant or operational environment are acceptable and 
the results acceptable? 
3.3 For the assigned TRL rating for each CT, did the TRA team document 
and support their decisions with credible and verified evidence, such as 
test analytical reports, requirements documents, schematics, and other 
key documents? 
4.1 Is there a policy or guidance on how TRA reports should be prepared, 
including a template that identify the elements to report and document; 
process for submission, review, and approval; how the TRA results 
should be communicated; and who should be involved? 
4.2 Does the TRA report include the following key information: (1) 
executive summary of the rating, (2) program background information, (3) 
TRA purpose and scope, (4) process for conducting the TRA, including 
Step 3 – Evaluate the Critical 
Technologies 
Step 4 – Prepare the TRA 
Report 
=== page 114 ===
 
Appendix II: Key Questions to Assess How 
Well Programs Followed the Five Step Process 
for Conducting a TRA 
 
 
 
 
Page 109 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
the selection of CTs, (5) rating for each CT assessed, (6) supporting 
evidence for each CT assessed including references to test results and 
other key documents, and (7) executive staff approval of the TRA report 
rating? 
4.3 Upon completion of the assessment by the TRA team, did 
management check or attest the factual accuracy of the TRA report? 
4.4 Does the TRA report include management’s response (i.e., 
concurrence, or dissenting views with the findings)? Is the response 
clearly written, logical, and supported by evidence to support the 
position? 
5.1 Was the TRA report used for its intended purpose, such as to inform 
decision makers about whether a prescribed TRL goal has been met, 
identify potential areas of concern or risk, or other purpose? 
5.2 For CTs that are assessed as immature and did not meet the TRL 
goal, which of the following actions were taken? 
1. Identify alternative or backup technologies? 
2. Initiated development of a TMP? 
3. Update the program risk management plan? 
4. Update the cost and schedule risk assessment? 
5.3 For TRA reports used for governance purposes, was the report 
timely? (e.g., submitted in advance of the decision point or stage gate to 
allow sufficient time to use the information) 
5.4 Does the TRA report document lessons learned? 
Step 5 –Use the TRA Report 
Findings 
=== page 115 ===
 
Appendix III: Case Study Backgrounds 
 
 
 
 
Page 110 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The Guide’s case studies are from GAO reports described in this 
appendix. Table 6 shows the relationship between the case study, GAO 
report and the page number where they can be found. The table is 
arranged by the order in which they appear. Following the table, 
paragraphs describe the reports and are ordered by the case study 
number as they appear in the Guide. 
Table 6: GAO Reports Used as Case Study in the TRA Guide 
Source: GAO website. | GAO-20-48G 
 
In 2019, the Navy was determining the acquisition strategy for the Next 
Generation Jammer Low-Band program and analyzing potential solutions 
to meet its capability needs. The program is an external jamming pod 
system that will be fitted on EA-18G Growler aircraft in order to disrupt 
adversaries’ use of the electromagnetic spectrum for radar detection, 
among other purposes. The Navy was planning to execute the program 
as a middle tier acquisition. A middle tier acquisition—also referred to as 
a Section 804 program—is a program that uses a streamlined acquisition 
process to rapidly prototype or field capabilities within a 5-year period. 
One of the factors program officials considered to determine whether the 
program would move forward as a middle tier acquisition was the 
technology maturity of critical technologies to be used on the program. 
Appendix III: Case Study Backgrounds 
Case 
Study 
GAO report Page no. 
1 GAO-19-336SP: GAO, Weapon Systems Annual 
Assessment: Limited Use of Knowledge-Based Practices 
Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investment 
21 
2 GAO-08-408, Defense Acquisitions: 2009 is a Critical 
Juncture for the Army’s Future Combat System 
28 
3 GAO-10-675: Coal Power Plants: Opportunities Exist for 
DOE to Provide Better Information on the Maturity of Key 
Technologies to Reduce Carbon Dioxide Emissions 
29 
4 GAO-07-96, Space Acquisitions, DOD Needs to Take More 
Action to Address Unrealistic Initial Cost Estimates of Space 
Systems 
30 
5 GAO-02-201, Defense Acquisitions: Steps to Improve the 
Crusader Program’s Investment Decisions  
49 
6 GAO-18-158: Columbia Class Submarine: Immature 
Technologies Present Risks to Achieving Cost, Schedule, 
and Performance Goals 
51 
7 GAO-08-467SP, Defense Acquisitions: Assessments of 
Selected Weapon Programs 
92 
Case Study 1: Knowledge-
Building TRAs Inform 
Acquisition Strategies, 
GAO-19-336SP 
=== page 116 ===
 
Appendix III: Case Study Backgrounds 
 
 
 
 
Page 111 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The Navy used a technology maturity assessment process it cited as a 
best practice to inform the program of any technology maturity concerns 
prior to it making key decisions about its acquisition strategy. According to 
the Navy, in October 2018, two contracts were awarded to assess 
maturity of technologies, identify potential materiel solutions, and inform 
acquisition strategy development. Both contractors were required to 
provide technology demonstration prototypes and demonstrate 
technology maturity in a relevant test environment. In July 2019, an 
independent Navy assessment team conducted technology maturity 
assessments of both contractors’ prototype designs using a process it 
described as having the rigor and discipline of a TRA. We refer to these 
types of assessments as knowledge-building TRAs. The team examined 
contractor self-assessments based on technical work breakdown 
structures and supplemental information from the contractors to perform 
its assessments. Based in part of the results of these assessments, the 
program proposed moving forward as a middle tier acquisition program. 
See, GAO, Weapon Systems Annual Assessment: Limited Use of 
Knowledge-Based Practices Continues to Undercut DOD’s Investments, 
GAO-19-336SP, May 2019. Subsequent follow-on work was conducted 
for this case study. 
 
The Future Combat Systems (FCS) program—comprised of 14 integrated 
weapon systems and an advanced information network—was the 
centerpiece of the Army’s effort to transition to a lighter, more agile, and 
more capable combat force. Congress required the Secretary of Defense 
to review and report on specific aspects of the program, including the 
maturity of critical technologies, program risks, demonstrations of the 
FCS concept and software, and a cost estimate and affordability 
assessment. 
Maturing technologies to TRL 7 (fully functional prototype demonstrated 
in an operational environment) prior to starting product development is a 
best practice and a DOD policy preference. In 2008, GAO reported that 
FCS’s critical technologies remained at low TRLs nearly 5 years and $12 
billion into development. Accordingly, many of these immature 
technologies may have an adverse cumulative impact on key FCS 
capabilities. Insufficient oversight and review was one factor that 
contributed to the program’s subsequent cancellation. 
See, GAO, Defense Acquisitions: 2009 Is a Critical Juncture for the 
Army’s Future Combat System, GAO-08-408, March 2008. 
Case Study 2: Immature 
Technologies Increases 
Risk, GAO-08-408 
=== page 117 ===
 
Appendix III: Case Study Backgrounds 
 
 
 
 
Page 112 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Coal power plants generate about half of the United States’ electricity and 
are expected to remain a key energy source. Coal power plants also 
account for about one-third of the nation’s emissions of carbon dioxide 
(CO2), the primary greenhouse gas that experts believe contributes to 
climate change. At the time, regulatory efforts and proposed legislation 
had sought to reduce CO2 emissions that could have affected coal power 
plants. 
In 2010, GAO reported that the U.S. DOE did not use a standard set of 
benchmarks or terms to describe the maturity of technologies, which 
limited its ability to provide key information to Congress, utilities, and 
other stakeholders. This lack of information limited congressional 
oversight of DOE’s expenditures on these efforts, and it hampered 
policymakers’ efforts to gauge the maturity of these technologies as they 
considered climate change policies. 
See, Opportunities Exist for DOE to Provide Better Information on the 
Maturity of Key Technologies to Reduce Carbon Dioxide Emissions, 
GAO-10-675, June 2010. 
 
In 2006, GAO reported that in five of the six space system acquisition 
programs reviewed, program officials and cost estimators assumed that 
technologies critical to the programs would be mature and available—
even though the programs began without a complete understanding of 
how long or how much it would cost to ensure technologies could work as 
intended. For example, on the National Polar-orbiting Environmental 
Satellite System program, DOD and the Department of Commerce 
committed to the development and production of satellites before the 
technology was mature—only 1 of 14 critical technologies was mature at 
program initiation and one technology was determined to be less mature 
after the contractor conducted more verification testing. This led to 
significant cost increases and schedule delays. 
See, Space Acquisitions, DOD Needs to Take More Action to Address 
Unrealistic Initial Cost Estimates of Space Systems, GAO-07-96, 
November 2006. 
 
Case Study 3: 
Assessments Needed to 
Provide Better Information, 
GAO-10-675 
Case Study 4: Space 
Programs Often 
Underestimate Costs, 
GAO-07-96 
=== page 118 ===
 
Appendix III: Case Study Backgrounds 
 
 
 
 
Page 113 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
In 1994, the Army began to develop the Crusader, an advanced artillery 
system consisting of a self-propelled 155-millimeter howitzer and a 
resupply vehicle. The Army’s total acquisition cost in the Crusader 
program was projected to be about $11 billion. 
In 2002, GAO reported that the maturity of a program’s technologies at 
the start of product development was a good predictor of that program’s 
future performance. Our past reviews of programs incorporating 
technologies into new products and weapon systems showed that they 
were more likely to meet product objectives when the technologies were 
matured before product development started. Additionally, GAO reported 
that, based on current Army plans, the Army would begin the Crusader’s 
product development in April 2003 but before maturing critical Crusader 
technologies to a level considered low risk relative to best practices. 
These risks related less to whether these technologies could be matured, 
but more to how much time and cost it would take to mature them. If, after 
starting product development, the Crusader technologies did not mature 
on schedule and instead caused delays, the Army may have spent more 
and taken longer to develop, produce, and field the Crusader system. 
See, Defense Acquisition, Steps to Improve the Crusader Program’s 
Investment Decisions, GAO-02-201, February 2002. 
 
The Navy’s Columbia class ballistic missile submarines will replace the 14 
Ohio class that currently provide the sea-based leg of the U.S. nuclear 
triad, slated to begin retiring in 2027. Additional development and testing 
are required to demonstrate the maturity of several Columbia class 
submarine technologies that are critical to performance, including the 
Integrated Power System, nuclear reactor, common missile compartment, 
and propulsor and related coordinated stern technologies. 
The Columbia-class submarine program is a $126 billion effort to build 12 
nuclear powered ballistic missile submarines. We used the criteria from 
GAO’s TRA Guide to evaluate the quality and completeness of the Navy’s 
assessment of technology readiness and risk. GAO found that the Navy 
underrepresented the program’s technology risks in its 2015 TRA when it 
did not identify several technologies as critical. In 2017, GAO reported 
that the Navy did not follow our identified best practices for identifying 
critical technologies for the program, resulting in an underrepresentation 
of the technical risk. Development of these technologies is key to meeting 
cost, schedule, and performance requirements. A high-quality TRA 
serves as the basis for realistic discussions on how to mitigate risks as 
Case Study 5: Program 
Updates Can Change 
Critical Technologies, 
GAO-02-201 
Case Study 6: Narrow 
View of Critical 
Technologies Can Result 
in Underrepresentation of 
the Technical Risks, 
GAO-18-158 
=== page 119 ===
 
Appendix III: Case Study Backgrounds 
 
 
 
 
Page 114 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
programs move forward from the early stages of technology development. 
Not identifying these technologies as critical means Congress may not 
have had the full picture of the technology risks and their potential effect 
on cost, schedule, and performance goals as increasing financial 
commitments were made. 
GAO, Columbia Class Submarine: Immature Technologies Present Risks 
to Achieving Cost, Schedule, and Performance Goals, GAO-18-158, 
December 2017. 
 
The Navy’s P-8A Multi-mission Maritime Aircraft (P-8A), a militarized 
version of the Boeing 737, was the replacement for the P-3C. Its primary 
roles were persistent antisubmarine warfare; anti-surface warfare; and 
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The P-8A shared an 
integrated maritime patrol mission with the Broad Area Maritime 
Surveillance Unmanned Aircraft System and the EPX (formerly the Navy 
Aerial Common Sensor). These systems were intended to sustain and 
improve the Navy’s maritime warfighting capability. 
In 2008, GAO reported that none of the Navy’s P-8A Multi-mission 
Maritime Aircraft’s initial four critical technologies were mature when it 
entered development in May 2004. At the time, the program identified 
mature backup technologies for each of the four, which, according to 
program officials, would still allow the P-8A to meet minimum 
requirements. Since then, the program removed one critical technology, 
replaced it with backups, and added a new critical technology. In 2008, 
the program office reported to GAO that the maturation of critical 
technologies was on schedule to support the System Development and 
Demonstration phase. At that time, the program also met and exceeded 
the cost, schedule, and performance parameters defined in the P-8A 
Acquisition Program Baseline Agreement. 
See, Defense Acquisitions, Assessments of Selected Weapon Programs, 
GAO-08-467SP, March 2008. 
 
Case Study 7: Identifying 
Back-up Critical 
Technologies, 
GAO-08-467SP 
The P-8A program 
=== page 120 ===
 
Appendix IV: Examples of Various TRL 
Definitions and Descriptions by Organization 
 
 
 
 
Page 115 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Table 7: DOD Technology Readiness Levels (2011) 
TRL Definition Description 
1 Basic principles observed and 
reported 
Lowest level of technology readiness. Scientific research begins to be translated into 
applied research and development (R&D). Examples might include paper studies of a 
technology’s basic properties. 
2 Technology concept and/or 
applications formulated 
Invention begins. Once basic principles are observed, practical applications can be 
invented. Applications are speculative and there may be no proof or detailed analysis to 
support the assumptions. Examples are limited to analytic studies. 
3 Analytical and experimental 
function and/or characteristic proof 
of concept 
Active R&D is initiated. This includes analytical studies and laboratory studies to 
physically validate the analytical predictions of separate elements of the technology. 
Examples include components that are not yet integrated or representative. 
4 Component and/or breadboard 
validation in a laboratory 
environment 
Basic technological components are integrated to establish that they will work together. 
This is relatively “low fidelity” compared with the eventual system. Examples include 
integration of “ad hoc” hardware in the laboratory. 
5 Component and/or breadboard 
validation in a relevant environment 
Fidelity of breadboard technology increases significantly. The basic technological 
components are integrated with reasonably realistic supporting elements so they can be 
tested in a simulated environment. Examples include “high-fidelity” laboratory integration 
of components. 
6 System/subsystem model or 
prototype demonstration in a 
relevant environment 
Representative model or prototype system, which is well beyond that of TRL 5, is tested 
in a relevant environment. Represents a major step up in a technology’s demonstrated 
readiness. Examples include testing a prototype in a high-fidelity laboratory environment 
or in a simulated operational environment. 
7 System prototype demonstrated in 
an operational environment 
Prototype near or at planned operational system. Represents a major step up from TRL 6 
by requiring the demonstration of an actual system prototype in an operational 
environment (e.g., in an aircraft, in a vehicle, or in space. 
8 Actual system completed and 
qualified through test and 
demonstration. 
Technology has been proven to work in its final form and under expected conditions. In 
almost all cases, this TRL represents the end of the true system development. Examples 
include developmental test and evaluation (DT&E) of the system in its intended weapon 
system to determine if it meets design specifications. 
9 Actual system proven through 
successful mission operations. 
Actual application of the technology in its final form and under mission conditions, such as 
those encountered in operational test and evaluations (OT&E). Examples include using 
the system under operational conditions. 
Source: GAO presentation of DOD information. | GAO-20-48G. 
 
Table 8: DOD Software Technology Readiness Levels (2009) 
TRL Definition Description 
1 Basic principles observed and 
reported. 
Lowest level of software technology readiness. A new domain is being investigated by the 
basic research community. This level extends to the development of basic use, basic 
properties of software architecture, mathematical formulations, and general algorithms. 
2 Technology concept and/or 
application formulated. 
Once basic principles are observed, practical applications can be invented. Applications 
are speculative, and there may be no proof or detailed analysis to support the 
assumptions. Examples are limited to analytic studies using synthetic data. 
Appendix IV: Examples of Various TRL 
Definitions and Descriptions by Organization 
=== page 121 ===
 
Appendix IV: Examples of Various TRL 
Definitions and Descriptions by Organization 
 
 
 
 
Page 116 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
TRL Definition Description 
3 Analytical and experimental critical 
function and/or characteristic proof 
of concept. 
Active R&D is initiated. The level at which scientific feasibility is demonstrated through 
analytical and laboratory studies. This level extends to the development of limited 
functionality environments to validate critical properties and analytical predictions using 
non-integrated software components and partially representative data. 
4 Module and/or subsystem validation 
in a laboratory environment (i.e., 
software prototype development 
environment). 
Basic software components are integrated to establish that they will work together. They 
are relatively primitive with regard to efficiency and robustness compared with the 
eventual system. Architecture development initiated to include interoperability, reliability, 
maintainability, extensibility, scalability, and security issues. Emulation with current/legacy 
element as appropriate. Prototypes developed to demonstrate different aspects of 
eventual system. 
5 Module and/or subsystem validation 
in a relevant environment. 
Level at which software technology is ready to start integration with existing systems. The 
prototype implementations conform to target environment/interfaces. Experiments with 
realistic problems. Simulated interfaces to existing systems. System software architecture 
established. Algorithms run on a processor(s) with characteristics expected in the 
operational environment. 
6 Module and/or subsystem validation 
in a relevant end-to-end 
environment. 
Level at which the engineering feasibility of a software technology is demonstrated. This 
level extends to laboratory prototype implementations on full-scale realistic problems in 
which the software technology is partially integrated with existing hardware/software 
systems. 
7 System prototype demonstration in 
an operational, high-fidelity 
environment. 
Level at which the program feasibility of a software technology is demonstrated. This level 
extends to operational environment prototype implementations, where critical technical 
risk functionality is available for demonstration and a test in which the software 
technology is well integrated with operational hardware/software systems. 
8 Actual system completed and 
mission qualified through test and 
demonstration in an operational 
environment. 
Level at which a software technology is fully integrated with operational hardware and 
software systems. Software development documentation is complete. All functionality 
tested in simulated and operational scenarios. 
9 Actual system proven through 
successful mission-proven 
operational capabilities. 
Level at which a software technology is readily repeatable and reusable. The software 
based on the technology is fully integrated with operational hardware/software systems. 
All software documentation verified. Successful operational experience. Sustaining 
software engineering support in place. Actual system. 
Source: GAO presentation of DOD information. | GAO-20-48G. 
 
Table 9: NASA Hardware Technology Readiness Levels (2013) 
TRL Definition Description 
1 Basic principles observed and 
reported. 
Scientific knowledge generated underpinning hardware technology concepts/applications. 
2 Technology concept and/or 
application formulated. 
Invention begins, practical application is identified but is speculative, no experimental 
proof or detailed analysis is available to support the conjecture. 
3 Analytical and experimental critical 
function and/or characteristic proof 
of concept. 
Analytical studies place the technology in an appropriate context and laboratory 
demonstrations, modeling and simulation validate analytical prediction. 
4 Component and/or breadboard 
validation in laboratory 
environment. 
A low fidelity system/component breadboard is built and operated to demonstrate basic 
functionality and critical test environments, and associated performance predictions are 
defined relative to the final operating environment. 
=== page 122 ===
 
Appendix IV: Examples of Various TRL 
Definitions and Descriptions by Organization 
 
 
 
 
Page 117 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
TRL Definition Description 
5 Component and/or breadboard 
validation in relevant environment. 
A medium fidelity system/component brassboard is built and operated to demonstrate 
overall performance in a simulated operational environment with realistic support 
elements that demonstrates overall performance in critical areas. Performance predictions 
are made for subsequent development phases. 
6 System/sub-system model or 
prototype demonstration in an 
operational environment. 
A high fidelity system/component prototype that adequately addresses all critical scaling 
issues is built and operated in a relevant environment to demonstrate operations under 
critical environmental conditions. 
7 System prototype demonstration in 
an operational environment. 
A high fidelity engineering unit that adequately addresses all critical scaling issues is built 
and operated in a relevant environment to demonstrate performance in the actual 
operational environment and platform (ground, airborne, or space). 
8 Actual system completed and 
“flight qualified” through test and 
demonstration. 
The final product in its final configuration is successfully demonstrated through test and 
analysis for its intended operational environment and platform (ground, airborne, or 
space). 
9 Actual system flight proven through 
successful mission operations. 
The final product is successfully operated in an actual mission.  
Source: GAO presentation of NASA information. | GAO-20-48G 
 
Table 10: NASA Software Technology Readiness Levels (2013) 
TRL Definition Description 
1 Basic principles observed and 
reported. 
Scientific knowledge generated underpinning basic properties of software architecture and 
mathematical formulation. 
2 Technology concept and/or 
application formulated. 
Practical application is identified but is speculative, no experimental proof or detailed 
analysis is available to support the conjecture. Basic properties of algorithms, 
representations and concepts defined. Basic principles coded. Experiments performed 
with synthetic data. 
3 Analytical and experimental critical 
function and/or characteristic proof 
of concept. 
Development of limited functionality to validate critical properties and predictions using 
non-integrated software components. 
4 Component and/or breadboard 
validation in laboratory 
environment. 
Key, functionally critical, software components are integrated, and functionally validated, to 
establish interoperability and begin architecture development. Relevant environments 
defined and performance in this environment predicted. 
5 Component and/or breadboard 
validation in relevant environment. 
End-to-end software elements implemented and interfaced with existing systems/ 
simulations conforming to target environment. End-to-end software system, tested in 
relevant environment, meeting predicted performance. Operational environment 
performance predicted. Prototype implementations developed. 
6 System/sub-system model or 
prototype demonstration in an 
operational environment. 
Prototype implementations of the software demonstrated on full-scale realistic problems. 
Partially integrate with existing hardware/software systems. Limited documentation 
available. Engineering feasibility fully demonstrated. 
7 System prototype demonstration in 
an operational environment. 
Prototype software exists having all key functionality available for demonstration and test. 
Well integrated with operational hardware/software systems demonstrating operational 
feasibility. Most software bugs removed. Limited documentation available. 
=== page 123 ===
 
Appendix IV: Examples of Various TRL 
Definitions and Descriptions by Organization 
 
 
 
 
Page 118 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
TRL Definition Description 
8 Actual system completed and 
“flight qualified” through test and 
demonstration. 
All software has been thoroughly debugged and fully integrated with all operational 
hardware and software systems. All user documentation, training documentation, and 
maintenance documentation completed. All functionality successfully demonstrated in 
simulated operational scenarios. Verification and Validation (V&V) completed. 
9 Actual system flight proven 
through successful mission 
operations. 
All software has been thoroughly debugged and fully integrated with all operational 
hardware/software systems. All documentation has been completed. Sustaining software 
engineering support is in place. System has been successfully operated in the operational 
environment. 
Source: GAO presentation of NASA information. | GAO-20-48G 
 
Table 11: DOE Technology Readiness Levels (2011) 
TRL Definition Description 
1 Basic principles observed and 
reported 
This is the lowest level of technology readiness. Scientific research begins to be 
translated into applied R&D. Examples might include paper studies of a technology’s 
basic properties or experimental work that consists mainly of observations of the physical 
world. Supporting Information includes published research or other references that identify 
the principles that underlie the technology. 
2 Technology concept and/or 
applications formulated 
Once basic principles are observed, practical applications can be invented. Applications 
are speculative, and there may be no proof or detailed analysis to support the 
assumptions. Examples are still limited to analytic studies. Supporting information 
includes publications or other references that outline the application being considered and 
that provide analysis to support the concept. The step up from TRL 1 to TRL 2 moves the 
ideas from pure to applied research. Most of the work is analytical or paper studies with 
the emphasis on understanding the science better. Experimental work is designed to 
corroborate the basic scientific observations made during TRL 1 work. 
3 Analytical and experimental critical 
function and/or characteristic proof 
of concept 
Active research and development is initiated. This includes analytical studies and 
laboratory-scale studies to physically validate the analytical predictions of separate 
elements of the technology. Examples include components that are not yet integrated or 
representative tested with simulants. Supporting information includes results of laboratory 
tests performed to measure parameters of interest and comparison to analytical 
predictions for critical subsystems. At TRL 3 the work has moved beyond the paper phase 
to experimental work that verifies that the concept works as expected on simulants. 
Components of the technology are validated, but there is no attempt to integrate the 
components into a complete system. Modeling and simulation may be used to 
complement physical experiments. 
4 Component and/or system 
validation in laboratory 
environment 
The basic technological components are integrated to establish that the pieces will work 
together. This is relatively “low fidelity” compared with the eventual system. Examples 
include integration of ad hoc hardware in a laboratory and testing with a range of 
simulants and small scale tests on actual waste. Supporting information includes the 
results of the integrated experiments and estimates of how the experimental components 
and experimental test results differ from the expected system performance goals. TRL 4-6 
represent the bridge from scientific research to engineering. TRL 4 is the first step in 
determining whether the individual components will work together as a system. The 
laboratory system will probably be a mix of on hand equipment and a few special purpose 
components that may require special handling, calibration, or alignment to get them to 
function. 
=== page 124 ===
 
Appendix IV: Examples of Various TRL 
Definitions and Descriptions by Organization 
 
 
 
 
Page 119 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
TRL Definition Description 
5 Laboratory scale, similar system 
validation in relevant environment 
The basic technological components are integrated so that the system configuration is 
similar to (matches) the final application in almost all respects. Examples include testing a 
high-fidelity, laboratory scale system in a simulated environment with a range of 
simulants1 and actual waste. Supporting information includes results from the laboratory 
scale testing, analysis of the differences between the laboratory and eventual operating 
system/environment, and analysis of what the experimental results mean for the eventual 
operating system/environment. The major difference between TRL 4 and 5 is the increase 
in the fidelity of the system and environment to the actual application. The system tested 
is almost prototypical. 
6 Engineering/pilot-scale, similar 
(prototypical) system validation in 
relevant environment 
Engineering-scale models or prototypes are tested in a relevant environment. This 
represents a major step up in a technology’s demonstrated readiness. Examples include 
testing an engineering scale prototypical system with a range of simulants. Supporting 
information includes results from the engineering scale testing and analysis of the 
differences between the engineering scale, prototypical system/environment, and analysis 
of what the experimental results mean for the eventual operating system/environment. 
TRL 6 begins true engineering development of the technology as an operational system. 
The major difference between TRL 5 and 6 is the step up from laboratory scale to 
engineering scale and the determination of scaling factors that will enable design of the 
operating system. The prototype should be capable of performing all the functions that will 
be required of the operational system. The operating environment for the testing should 
closely represent the actual operating environment. 
7 Full-scale, similar (prototypical) 
system demonstrated in relevant 
environment 
This represents a major step up from TRL 6, requiring demonstration of an actual system 
prototype in a relevant environment. Examples include testing full-scale prototype in the 
field with a range of simulants in cold commissioning. Supporting information includes 
results from the full-scale testing and analysis of the differences between the test 
environment, and analysis of what the experimental results mean for the eventual 
operating system/environment. Final design is virtually complete. 
8 Actual system completed and 
qualified through test and 
demonstration. Technology has 
been proven to work in its final 
form and under expected 
conditions. In almost all cases, this 
TRL represents the end of true 
system development. 
The technology has been proven to work in its final form and under expected conditions. 
In almost all cases, this TRL represents the end of true system development. Examples 
include developmental testing and evaluation of the system with actual waste in hot 
commissioning. Supporting information includes operational procedures that are virtually 
complete. An Operational Readiness Review (ORR) has been successfully completed 
prior to the start of hot testing. 
9 Actual system operated over the 
full range of expected conditions. 
Actual operation of the technology 
in its final form, under the full range 
of operating conditions. 
The technology is in its final form and operated under the full range of operating mission 
conditions. Examples include using the actual system with the full range of wastes in hot 
operations. 
Source: GAO presentation of DOE information. | GAO-20-48G 
 
  
=== page 125 ===
 
Appendix IV: Examples of Various TRL 
Definitions and Descriptions by Organization 
 
 
 
 
Page 120 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Table 12: Department of Transportation Technology Readiness Levels (2017) 
 TRL Description To achieve the given TRL, you should answer yes to EVERY question. 
Discuss any uncertain answers. 
Basic Research 1 Basic principles and 
research 
Do basic scientific principles support the concept? 
Has the technology development methodology or approach been developed? 
2 Application formulated Are potential system applications identified? 
Are system components and the user interface at least partly described? 
Do preliminary analyses or experiments confirm that the application might 
meet the user need? 
3 Proof of Concept Are system performance metrics established? 
Is system feasibility fully established? 
Do experiments or modeling and simulation validate performance predictions 
of system capability? 
Does the technology address a need or introduce an innovation in the field of 
transportation? 
Applied Research 4 Components validated in 
laboratory environment 
Are end-user requirements documented? 
Does a plausible draft integration plan exist, and is component compatibility 
demonstrated? 
Were individual components successfully tested in a laboratory environment 
(a fully controlled test environment where a limited number of critical functions 
are tested)? 
5 Integrated components 
demonstrated in a 
laboratory environment 
Are external and internal system interfaces documented? 
Are target and minimum operational requirements developed? 
Is component integration demonstrated in a laboratory environment (i.e., fully 
controlled setting)? 
Development 6 Prototype system 
demonstrated in a relevant 
environment 
Is the operational environment (i.e., user community, physical environment, 
and input data characteristics, as appropriate) fully known? 
Was the prototype tested in a realistic and relevant environment outside the 
laboratory? 
Does the prototype satisfy all operational requirements when confronted with 
realistic problems? 
7 Prototype demonstrated in 
operational environment 
Are available components representative of production components? 
Is the fully integrated prototype demonstrated in an operational environment 
(i.e., real-world conditions, including the user community)? 
Are all interfaces tested individually under stressed and anomalous 
conditions? 
8 Technology proven in 
operational environment 
Are all system components form-, fit-, and function-compatible with each 
other and with the operational environment? 
Is the technology proven in an operational environment (i.e., meet target 
performance measures)? 
Was a rigorous test and evaluation process completed successfully? 
Does the technology meet its stated purpose and functionality as designed? 
=== page 126 ===
 
Appendix IV: Examples of Various TRL 
Definitions and Descriptions by Organization 
 
 
 
 
Page 121 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
 TRL Description To achieve the given TRL, you should answer yes to EVERY question. 
Discuss any uncertain answers. 
Implementation 9 Technology refined and 
adopted 
Is the technology deployed in its intended operational environment? 
Is information about the technology disseminated to the user community? 
Is the technology adopted by the user community? 
Source: GAO presentation of Department of Transportation information. | GAO-20-48G 
=== page 127 ===
 
Appendix V: Other Types of Readiness Levels 
 
 
 
 
Page 122 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Manufacturing readiness levels (MRLs). Used in conjunction with TRLs, 
MRLs are key measures that define risk when a technology or process is 
matured and transitioned to a system. It is common for manufacturing 
readiness to be paced by technology readiness or design stability. 
Manufacturing processes will not be able to mature until the product 
technology and product designs are stable. MRLs can also be used to 
define manufacturing readiness and risk at the system or subsystem 
level. For those reasons, the MRL criteria were designed to include a 
nominal level of technology readiness as a prerequisite for each level of 
manufacturing readiness. Although the MRLs are numbered, the numbers 
themselves are unimportant. The numbers represent a non-linear ordinal 
scale that identifies what maturity should be as a function of where a 
program is in the acquisition life-cycle. Using numbers is simply a 
convenient naming convention. Table 14 shows a short summary of the 
full criteria and metrics for each of the 10 MRLs (numbered 1 through 
10).1 
Table 13: DOD Manufacturing Readiness Levels 
MRL Definition Description 
1 Basic Manufacturing 
Implications Identified 
This is the lowest level of manufacturing readiness. The focus is to address manufacturing 
shortfalls and opportunities needed to achieve program objectives. Basic research (i.e., 
funded by budget activity) begins in the form of studies. 
2 Manufacturing Concepts 
Identified 
This level is characterized by describing the application of new manufacturing concepts. 
Applied research translates basic research into solutions for broadly defined military needs. 
Typically this level of readiness includes identification, paper studies and analysis of material 
and process approaches. An understanding of manufacturing feasibility and risk is emerging. 
3 Manufacturing Proof of 
Concept Developed 
This level begins the validation of the manufacturing concepts through analytical or laboratory 
experiments. This level of readiness is typical of technologies in Applied Research and 
Advanced Development. Materials and/or processes have been characterized for 
manufacturability and availability but further evaluation and demonstration is required. 
Experimental hardware models have been developed in a laboratory environment that may 
possess limited functionality. 
                                                                                                                       
1For additional information about manufacturing readiness, and details in the MRL Matrix, 
see, Department of Defense, Manufacturing Readiness Level (MRL) Deskbook, 
(Washington, D.C.,: 2018) (http://www.dodmrl.com/). 
Appendix V: Other Types of Readiness 
Levels 
=== page 128 ===
 
Appendix V: Other Types of Readiness Levels 
 
 
 
 
Page 123 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
MRL Definition Description 
4 Capability to produce the 
technology in a laboratory 
environment 
This level of readiness acts as an exit criterion for the Materiel Solution Analysis (MSA) 
Phase approaching a Milestone A decision. Technologies should have matured to at least 
TRL 4. This level indicates that the technologies are ready for the Technology Maturation & 
Risk Reduction Phase of acquisition. At this point, required investments, such as 
manufacturing technology development, have been identified. Processes to ensure 
manufacturability, producibility, and quality are in place and are sufficient to produce 
technology demonstrators. Manufacturing risks have been identified for building prototypes 
and mitigation plans are in place. Manufacturing, material, and special requirement cost 
drivers have been identified, and cost driver uncertainty has been qualified. Producibility 
assessments of design concepts have been completed. Key performance parameters have 
been identified as well as any special tooling, special handling, manufacturing skill sets, and 
workforce requirements and availability of facilities. 
5 Capability to produce prototype 
components in a production 
relevant environment 
This level of maturity is typical of the mid-point in the Technology Maturation & Risk 
Reduction Phase of acquisition, or in the case of key technologies, near the mid-point of an 
Advanced Technology Demonstration (ATD) project. Technologies should have matured to a 
minimum TRL 5. The industrial base assessment should have been initiated to identify 
potential manufacturing sources. The manufacturing strategy developed for the Milestone A 
Acquisition strategy has been refined with the technology maturation contractor and 
integrated into the risk management plan. Identification of enabling/critical technologies and 
components is complete. With release of product data required for prototype component 
manufacturing, evaluation of the design to determine Key Characteristics has been initiated. 
Prototype materials have been demonstrated on components in a production relevant 
environment, but many manufacturing processes and procedures are still in development. 
Manufacturing technology development efforts, as well as producibility assessments of key 
technologies and components have been initiated. 
6 Capability to produce a 
prototype system or subsystem 
in a production relevant 
environment 
This MRL is associated with readiness for a Milestone B decision to initiate an acquisition 
program by entering into the Engineering and Manufacturing Development (EMD) Phase of 
acquisition. Technologies should have matured to at least TRL 6. It is normally seen as the 
level of manufacturing readiness that denotes acceptance of a preliminary system design. An 
initial manufacturing approach has been developed. The majority of manufacturing processes 
have been defined and characterized, but there are still significant engineering and/or design 
changes in the system itself. However, preliminary design has been completed and 
producibility assessments and trade studies of key technologies and components are 
complete. Manufacturing processes and manufacturing technology solutions, materials, 
tooling and test equipment, as well as personnel skills have been demonstrated on 
components, subsystems, and/or systems in a production relevant environment. Cost, yield, 
and rate analyses have been performed to assess how prototype data compare to target 
objectives, and the program has developed appropriate risk reduction strategies to achieve 
cost requirements. Producibility trade studies and producibility considerations have shaped 
system development plans. Industrial capabilities assessment for Milestone B has been 
completed. Long-lead and key supply chain elements have been identified. 
=== page 129 ===
 
Appendix V: Other Types of Readiness Levels 
 
 
 
 
Page 124 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
MRL Definition Description 
7 Capability to produce systems, 
subsystems, or components in 
a production representative 
environment 
This level of manufacturing readiness is typical for the mid-point of the Engineering and 
Manufacturing Development (EMD) Phase leading to the CDR. Technologies should be 
assessed at a minimum of TRL 7. System detailed design activity is nearing completion. 
Material specifications have been approved and materials are available to meet the planned 
pilot line build schedule. Manufacturing processes and procedures have been demonstrated 
in a production representative environment. Detailed producibility trade studies are 
completed and producibility enhancements and risk assessments are underway. The cost 
model has been updated with detailed designs produced in a production relevant 
environment, rolled up to system level, and tracked against allocated targets. Unit cost 
reduction efforts have been prioritized and are underway. Yield and rate analyses have been 
updated with production representative data. The supply chain and supplier quality 
assurance have been assessed and long-lead procurement plans are in place. Manufacturing 
plans and quality targets have been developed. Production tooling and test equipment design 
and development efforts are initiated and validation plans for Special Test Equipment/ 
Special Inspection Equipment (STE/SIE) are complete. 
8 Pilot line capability 
demonstrated; ready to begin 
Low Rate Initial Production 
(LRIP) 
This level is associated with readiness for a Milestone C decision, and entry into LRIP or 
initial production. Technologies should have matured to at least TRL 7 or 8. Detailed system 
design is complete and sufficiently stable to enter low rate production. All materials, 
manpower, tooling, test equipment, and facilities are proven on the pilot line and are available 
to meet the planned low rate production schedule. STE/SIE has been validated as part of 
pilot line validation in accordance with validation plans. Manufacturing and quality processes 
and procedures have been proven on a pilot line and are under control and ready for low rate 
production. Known producibility risks and issues pose no significant challenges for low rate 
production. Cost model and yield and rate analyses have been updated with pilot line results. 
Supplier qualification testing and first article inspections have been completed. The industrial 
base has been assessed for Milestone C and shows industrial capability is established to 
support LRIP. 
9 Low rate production 
demonstrated; Capability in 
place to begin Full Rate 
Production (FRP) 
At this level, the system, component, or item is in production, or has successfully achieved 
low rate initial production. Technologies should have matured to TRL 8 or 9. This level of 
readiness is normally associated with readiness for entry into FRP (rate production). All 
systems engineering/design requirements should have been met such that there are minimal 
system changes. Major system design features are stable and have been proven in 
operational test and evaluation. Materials, parts, manpower, tooling, test equipment, and 
facilities are available to meet planned rate production schedules. STE/SIE validation 
maintained and revalidated as necessary. Manufacturing process capability in a low rate 
production environment is at an appropriate quality level to meet KC tolerances. Risks and 
issues managed with monitoring ongoing. LRIP cost targets have been met, and learning 
curves have been analyzed with actual data. The cost model has been updated for FRP and 
reflects the impact of continuous improvement. 
10 Full Rate Production 
demonstrated and lean 
production practices in place 
This is the highest level of manufacturing readiness. Technologies should have matured to 
TRL 9. This level of manufacturing is normally associated with the Production & Deployment 
or Operations & Sustainment phases of the acquisition life cycle. Engineering/design 
changes are few and generally limited to continuous improvement changes or obsolescence 
issues. System, components, and items are in full rate production and meet all engineering, 
performance, quality, and reliability requirements. Manufacturing process capability is at the 
appropriate quality level. All materials, tooling, inspection and test equipment, facilities and 
manpower are in place and have met full rate production requirements. STE/SIE validation 
maintained and revalidated as necessary. Rate production unit costs meet goals, and funding 
is sufficient for production at required rates. Continuous process improvements are ongoing. 
Source: GAO presentation of DOD information. | GAO-20-48G 
 
=== page 130 ===
 
Appendix V: Other Types of Readiness Levels 
 
 
 
 
Page 125 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Integration readiness level (IRL). This metric measures the integration 
maturity between two or more components. IRLs, in conjunction with 
TRLs, form the basis for the development of the system readiness level 
(SRL). The IRL values range from 0 to 9. The original IRL scale 
definitions, as proposed by Sauser, have been modified to be consistent 
with the foundation of the TRL scale and to reflect more closely reflect the 
DOD development approach.2 IRLs represent the systematic analysis of 
the interactions between various integration points. Using IRLs assists the 
systems engineer in identifying development areas that require additional 
engineering. IRLs also provide a means to reduce the risk involved in 
maturing and integrating components into a system. Thus, IRLs supply a 
common measure of comparison for both new system development and 
technology insertion. The table below describes the decision criteria for 
assessing IRLs. 
Table 14: Integration Readiness Levels 
IRL Definition Evidence Description 
0 No integration No integration between specified components has been planned or intended 
1 A high-level concept for integration has been 
identified. 
Principle integration technologies have been identified 
Top-level functional architecture and interface points have been defined 
High-level concept of operations and principal use cased has been started 
2 There is some level of specificity of 
requirements to characterize the interaction 
between components 
Inputs/outputs for principal integration technologies/mediums are known, 
characterized and documented 
Principal interface requirements and/or specifications for integration 
technologies have been defined/drafted 
3 The detailed integration design has been 
defined to include all interface details 
Detailed interface design has been documented 
System interface diagrams have been completed 
Inventory of external interfaces is completed and data engineering units are 
identified and documented 
4 Validation of interrelated functions between 
integrating components in a laboratory 
environment 
Functionality of integrating technologies (modules/functions/assemblies) has 
been successfully demonstrated in a laboratory/synthetic environment 
Data transport method(s) and specifications have been defined 
5 Validation of interrelated functions between 
integrating components in a relevant 
environment 
Individual modules tested to verify that the module components (functions) 
work together 
External interfaces are well defined (e.g., source, data formats, structure, 
content, method of support, etc.) 
                                                                                                                       
2Sauser, B., Ramirez-Marques, J., Magnaye, R., Tan, W. (2008). “A Systems Approach to 
Expanding the Technology Readiness Level within Defense Acquisition,” International 
Journal of Defense Acquisition Management, vol. 1.(2008):, 39-58. 
=== page 131 ===
 
Appendix V: Other Types of Readiness Levels 
 
 
 
 
Page 126 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
IRL Definition Evidence Description 
6 Validation of interrelated functions between 
integrating components in a relevant end-to-
end environment 
End-to-end Functionality of Systems Integration has been validated 
Data transmission tests completed successfully 
7 System prototype integration demonstration 
in an operational high-fidelity environment 
Fully integrated prototype has been successfully demonstrated in actual or 
simulated operational environment 
Each system/software interface tested individually under stressed and 
anomalous conditions 
8 System integration completed and mission 
qualified through test and demonstration in 
an operational environment 
Fully integrated system able to meet overall mission requirements in an 
operational environment 
System interfaces qualified and functioning correctly in an operational 
environment 
9 System integration is proven through 
successful mission proven operations 
capabilities 
Fully integrated system has demonstrated operational effectiveness and 
suitability in its intended or a representative operational environment 
Integration performance has been fully characterized and is consistent with 
user requirements 
Disclaimer: The IRL scale does not attempt to address or account for programmatic lifecycle activities or responsibilities. This scale is 
intended to be used to assign integration readiness levels based on the applicable definitions and supported by the evidence 
descriptions. 
Source: Marc Austin, and Donald York, Conference on System Engineering Research. | GAO-20-48G 
 
System readiness levels (SRL). The SRL index is a function of the 
individual TRLs in a system and their subsequent integration points with 
other technologies, IRL. The function of this interaction correlates to a 
nine level SRL index. The SRL index is defined by the current state of 
development of a system in relation to DOD’s Phases of Development for 
the Life Cycle Management Framework. 
Table 15: System Readiness Levels 
Level SRL Definition 
9 System has achieved initial operational capability and can satisfy mission 
objectives 
8 System interoperability should have been demonstrated in an operational 
environment 
7 System threshold capability should have been demonstrated at operational 
performance level using operational interfaces 
6 System component integrability should have been validated 
5 System high-risk component technology development should have been 
complete; low-risk system components identified 
4 System performance specifications and constraints should have been defined 
and the baseline has been allocated 
3 System high-risk immature technologies should have been identified and 
prototyped 
=== page 132 ===
 
Appendix V: Other Types of Readiness Levels 
 
 
 
 
Page 127 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Level SRL Definition 
2 System materiel solution should have been identified 
1 System alternative materiel solutions should have been considered 
Source: GAO presentation of NSA SRA Handbook SRL information. | GAO-20-48G 
=== page 133 ===
 
Appendix VI: Agency Websites where TRA 
Report Examples can be Found 
 
 
 
 
Page 128 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Department of Defense 
(http://acqnotes.com/acqnote/acquisitions/technology-readiness-
assessment) 
Department of Energy 
(https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/em/Volume_I/O_SRP.pdf) 
Department of Transportation  
(https://highways.dot.gov/exploratory-advanced-
research/research/technology-readiness-assessment-work-ear-program) 
Appendix VI: Agency Websites where TRA 
Report Examples can be Found 
=== page 134 ===
 
Appendix VII: Experts Who Helped Develop 
This Guide 
 
 
 
 
Page 129 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
The two lists in this appendix name the experts in the technology 
readiness assessment community, with their organizations, who helped 
us develop this guide. This first list names significant contributors to the 
TRA Guide. They attended and participated in numerous expert 
meetings, provided text or graphics, and submitted substantial comments. 
Table 16: Experts Who Made Significant Contributions 
Organization Expert 
Boeing Chahriar Assad 
Department of Defense Marc Austin 
Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
Studies and Analysis Institute 
David McGarvey 
Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security 
Studies and Analysis Institute 
Eric Sylwester 
Department of Energy, Office of Environmental Management Hoyt Johnson (retired) 
Institute for Defense Analyses Irv Boyles 
Institute for Defense Analyses David Sparrow 
Intrepid Defense Systems Mike Ellis (retired) 
JB Consulting Jim Bilbro 
Lockheed Martin Bradley Atwater 
Lockheed Martin Joe Uzdzinski 
NASA Faith Chandler 
Naval Research Laboratory Phillip Schwartz 
Navy, Perspecta (ONR contractor support) Chris Alberg 
Navy, NAVAIR Ed Copeland, Ph.D. 
SAIC Donald M. York 
Terranear PMC Jay Roach 
Waymo Matt Markel 
Source: Technology Experts. |. GAO-20-48G 
 
This second list names those who generously donated their time to 
review the TRA Guide in its various stages and provided feedback. 
 
 
 
Appendix VII: Experts Who Helped Develop 
This Guide 
=== page 135 ===
 
Appendix VII: Experts Who Helped Develop 
This Guide 
 
 
 
 
Page 130 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Table 17: Experts Who Made Noteworthy Contributions 
Organization Expert 
Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center 
(Software Engineering Institute) 
Edmund Conrow 
Air Force Ross Anderson 
Air Force Ken Barker 
Air Force Bill Bladygo 
Air Force John Cargill 
Air Force Charles Garland 
Air Force Debbie Grismer 
Air Force Janet Jackson 
Air Force David Karr 
Air Force Matthew Kowalski 
Air Force  Ed Kraft 
Air Force Claudia Kropas-Hughes 
Air Force Jim Malas (retired) 
Air Force Col. Lester Ogawa (retired) 
Air Force Walt Price 
Air Force Larry Roan 
Anser Joe Goyette 
Anser Michael McGrath 
ARCADIS U.S. Inc. Chris Carson 
Army (contractor) Kevin Meade 
Army (contractor) George Prohoda 
Army Robert Catterall 
Army Willie Fitzpatrick (retired) 
Army Steve Watts 
ARTEMIS Innovation John Mankins 
Bell Helicopter Stuart Retter 
Boeing Jose Alvarez 
Boeing Hitesh Bhadrecha 
Boeing Tom Brackey 
Boeing Ron Burch 
Boeing Mark Burgess 
Boeing Michael Ganowsky 
Boeing Matthew Ganz 
Boeing Mike Hill 
Boeing Davoud Manouchehri 
=== page 136 ===
 
Appendix VII: Experts Who Helped Develop 
This Guide 
 
 
 
 
Page 131 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Organization Expert 
Boeing Eric Miller 
Boeing Roy Okuno 
Boeing Michael Rosenthal 
Boeing John Tracey 
Boeing Charles Woods 
Capital Planning Investment Control Solutions Bill Mathis 
Engineering Consultant (formerly with the Air Force) Gary Stanley 
Defense Acquisition University Jeff Craver 
Defense Acquisition University William Decker 
Department of Defense Robert Cuellar 
Department of Defense Nichelle Dent 
Department of Defense Mark Evans 
Department of Defense (contractor) Mike Grieco 
Department of Defense (contractor) David Hillman 
Department of Defense (contractor) Timothy Ingles 
Department of Defense (contractor) Stephen Letschin 
Department of Defense (contractor) Brian Mack 
Department of Defense Stephen Spear 
Department Homeland Security Mark Adams 
Department Homeland Security Doug Drabkowski 
Department Homeland Security Jeanne Lin 
Department Homeland Security Christopher Smith 
Department of Commerce Jillian O’Connell 
Department of Defense/University of Maryland Jacques Gansler (former Under 
Secretary of Defense of 
Acquisition, Technology and 
Logistics) 
Department of Defense Jack Taylor (retired) 
Department of Energy Mark Arenaz 
Department of Energy Michael Cercy 
Department of Energy David Diddio 
Department of Energy Roland Frenck 
Department of Energy Denise Hill 
Department of Energy Laura Hobgood 
Department of Energy Brian Kong 
Department of Energy Herb Sutter 
Department of Transportation Matt Cuddy 
Department of Transportation Anita Kim 
=== page 137 ===
 
Appendix VII: Experts Who Helped Develop 
This Guide 
 
 
 
 
Page 132 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Organization Expert 
Department of Transportation David Kuehn 
Department of Transportation Elizabeth Machek 
Department of Transportation Ruben Sanchez 
Draper Laboratory Tony Radojevic 
GE Aviation Gene Wiggs (retired) 
George Washington University David Rico 
Hexagon US Federal Willie McFadden II 
Honeywell Aerospace Wayne Pearson 
Honeywell Aerospace Bob Rasmussen 
Honeywell Aerospace Bob Smith 
HRL Laboratories Mike Mulqueen 
HRL Laboratories Jeffrey William 
Institute for Defense Analyses Paul Kodzwa 
Institute for Defense Analyses Jay Mandelbaum 
Intelligent Systems Technology, Inc. Dave Zarnow 
Jacobs Engineering Uwe Hueter 
Johns Hopkins University Russell Fink 
MCRI Neil Albert 
MCRI Bill Chadwick 
MCRI Jason Dechoretz 
MCRI Brian Evans 
Microsoft Lewis Shepherd 
MIT  Alison Olechowski  
MITRE Alex Chu 
MITRE James Cook 
MITRE Marty Faga 
MITRE Jordan Feidler 
MITRE Marie Francesca 
MITRE Paul Garvey 
MITRE Alfred Grasso 
MITRE Chuck Howell 
MITRE Steve Huffman 
MITRE Lou Metzger 
MITRE Bill Neal 
MITRE Ed Palo 
MITRE Jason Providakes 
MITRE Brigitte Rolfe 
=== page 138 ===
 
Appendix VII: Experts Who Helped Develop 
This Guide 
 
 
 
 
Page 133 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Organization Expert 
MITRE Linda Rosen 
MITRE Brigitta Rubin 
MITRE Lillian Ryals 
MITRE Pete Sherlock 
MITRE Jeff Stevens 
MITRE John Wilson 
NASA Tim Crumbley 
NASA Jim Dempsey 
NASA Neil Dennehy 
NASA Ellen Gertsen 
NASA Steve Hirshorn 
NASA Sharon Jefferies 
NASA John Kelly 
NASA Orlando Melendez 
NASA Steve Noneman 
NASA Jan Rogers 
NASA Sandra Smalley 
NASA Joe Smith 
NASA Stephanie Stilson 
NASA Mike Tinker 
NASA David Voracek 
NASA Kulpa Vygantas 
Navy (contractor) Nazanin Asisan 
Navy Carly Jackson 
Navy Rich Volkert 
Navy Eric Wilson 
National Center for Advanced Technology Mark Gordon 
Northrop Grumman Jerry Nolte (retired) 
National Science Foundation William Miller 
National Science Foundation Mark Suskin 
Office of the Director of National Intelligence Dave Honey 
Potomac Institute Lee Buchanon 
Potomac Institute Jennifer Buss 
Potomac Institute Patrick Cheetham 
Potomac Institute Eselina Czopla 
Potomac Institute Bob Hummel 
Potomac Institute Alan Meghissi 
=== page 139 ===
 
Appendix VII: Experts Who Helped Develop 
This Guide 
 
 
 
 
Page 134 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Organization Expert 
Potomac Institute Al Munson 
Potomac Institute Dave Reist 
Potomac Institute Jim Richardson 
Potomac Institute Kathryn Schiller Winston 
Potomac Institute Mike Swetnam 
Pratt & Whitney (formerly with the DOD) James Kenyon 
RAND Corp Cindy Dion-Schwarz 
Raytheon Robert Byren 
Raytheon Steven Cummings 
Raytheon Roberta Gotfried 
Raytheon Rana Lavu 
Raytheon Mercy O’Hoyt 
Software Engineering Institute Michael Bandor 
Software Engineering Institute Mike McClendon 
Stevens Institute of Technology/Systems Engineering 
Research Center, a University-Affiliated Center of the 
Department of Defense 
Arthur Pyster 
Stevens Institute of Technology/Systems Engineering 
Research Center, a University-Affiliated Center of the 
Department of Defense 
Jose Ramirez-Marquez 
Stevens Institute of Technology/Systems Engineering 
Research Center, a University-Affiliated Center of the 
Department of Defense 
Dinesh Verma 
SpaceX Kyle Yang 
Texas A&M University Jonathan Coopersmith 
University of North Texas Brian Sauser 
USI-INC Don Szczur 
Source: Technology Experts. | GAO-20-48G 
=== page 140 ===
 
Appendix VIII: Contacts and Acknowledgments 
 
 
 
 
Page 135 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
 
Timothy M. Persons, Ph.D., Managing Director, Science Technology 
Assessment and Analytics/Chief Scientist, at (202) 512-6888 or 
personst@gao.gov 
Michele Mackin, Managing Director, Contracting and National Security 
Acquisitions, at (202) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov 
 
Brian Bothwell, Assistant Director, (213) 830-1160, bothwellb@gao.gov 
Ron Schwenn, Assistant Director, (202) 512-9219, schwennr@gao.gov 
John Ortiz Jr., Project Lead, (202) 512-4971, ortizj@gao.gov 
 
Other key contributors to this guide include Mathew Bader, Nabajyoti 
Barkakati, Amy Bowser, Jenny Chanley, Jehan Chase, Frederick 
Childers, Rebecca Eyler, Rob Grace, Dani Greene, Anna Irvine, 
Christopher (James) Madar, Anika McMillon, Carol Mebane, Katrina 
Pekar-Carpenter, Karen Richey, Penny Pickett, Umesh Thakkar, Walter 
Vance, Jacqueline Wade, Alyssa Weir. 
Appendix VIII: Contacts and 
Acknowledgments 
GAO Contacts 
Other Leadership on 
this Project 
Acknowledgments 
=== page 141 ===
 
References 
 
 
 
 
Page 136 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Ahalt, Virginia, Erin Doolittle, Cheyne Homberger. “Advances in System 
Readiness Assessment.” 84th Military Operations Research Society 
Symposium, 20-23 June 2016. 
Austin, Marc, Virginia Ahalt, Erin Doolittle, Cheyne Homberger, George 
Polacek, and Donald York. “Mitigating Integration Risks in Complex 
Systems.” 28th Annual INCOSE International Symposium. Washington 
D.C., July 2018. 
Austin, Marc, Cheyne Homberger, George Polaceck, Erin Doolittle, 
Virginia Ahalt, and Donald York.”Using Bayesian Networks to Validate 
Technology Readiness Assessments of Systems.” Disciplinary 
Convergence in Systems Engineering Research, pp. 787-797, November 
26, 2017. 
Austin, Marc, Cheyne Homberger, Virginia Ahalt, Erin Doolittle, George A. 
Polacek, and Donald York. Applying Bayesian Networks to TRL 
Assessments – Innovation in Systems Engineering. INCOSE, 27,no. 1, 
(July 2017): 1622-1634. 
Austin, Marc, and Donald York. “System Readiness Assessment (SRA) – 
An Illustrative Example.” 13th Annual Conference on Systems 
Engineering Research (CSER). Hoboken, N.J., March 2015. 
Austin, Marc, and Donald York. “System Readiness Assessment (SRA), 
A Vade Mecum.” Complex Systems Design and Management (CSDM) 
Conference. Paris, France, November 2015. 
Austin, Marc, and Donald York. “System Readiness Assessment (SRA), 
A Vade Mecum.” Complex Systems Design and Management (CSDM) 
Conference. Paris, France, November 2015. 
Austin, Mark, Cheyne Homberger, George Polacek, Erin Doolittle, Virginia 
Ahalt, and Donald York. “Using Bayesian Networks to Validate 
Technology Readiness Assessments of Systems.” 15th Annual 
Conference on Systems Engineering Research (CSER), Redondo Beach, 
CA, March 2017. 
Austin, Marc, Donald York. “Bucketology and an Enterprise Approach to 
System of Systems Development.” IEEE System of Systems (SoS) 
Conference, Paris, France, 19-22 June 2018. 
References 
=== page 142 ===
 
References 
 
 
 
 
Page 137 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Azizian, Nazanin, Shahram Sarkani, and Thomas Mazzuchi. “A 
Comprehensive Review and Analysis of Maturity Assessment 
Approaches for Improved Decision Support to Achieve Efficient Defense 
Acquisition.” Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering and 
Computer Science, no. II, October 2009. 
Bilbro, James. “Benefits and Limitations of Current Techniques for 
Measuring the Readiness of a System to Proceed to Production.” 
PowerPoint presented at the INCOSE Huntsville Regional Chapter 
Monthly Meeting, 2010. 
Bilbro, James. Systematic Assessment of the Program / Project Impacts 
of Technological Advancement and Insertion Revision A. George C 
Marshall Flight Center, December 2007. 
Blanchette Jr., Stephen, Cecilia Albert, and Suzanne Garcia-Miller. 
“Beyond Technology Readiness Levels for Software: U.S. Army 
Workshop Report.” Software Engineering Institute, Technical Report, 
CMU/SEI-2010-TR-044, ESC-TR-2010-109. December 2010. 
Craver, Jeff, and Lt. Col. Dian Hall. “Best Practices in Defense 
Technology Development and Technology Maturity Assessments.” 
PowerPoint Presentation at the Systems and Software Technology 
Conference, April 28, 2010. 
Department of Defense, Defense for Research and Engineering. 
Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) Guidance. Washington, D.C., 
April 2011. 
Department of Defense, Defense Research and Engineering. Technology 
Readiness Assessment (TRA) Deskbook, Washington, D.C., July 2009. 
Department of Defense, Defense for Science and Technology. 
Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) Deskbook, Washington, D.C., 
May 2005. 
Department of Defense, Defense for Science and Technology. 
Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) Deskbook. Washington, D.C., 
May 12, 2003. 
Ellis, Mike, and Jeff Craver. “Technology Program Management Model 
(TPMM), A Systems-Engineering Approach to Technology Development 
Program Management.” Dynetics, Inc. October 26, 2006. 
=== page 143 ===
 
References 
 
 
 
 
Page 138 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Fitzpatrick, William. “A Software Technology Readiness Assessment 
Process for Minimizing System Acquisition Risk.” PowerPoint 
Presentation, November 17, 2005. 
Fitzpatrick, William, Richard Wyskida, and Robert Loesh. “Using the 
Technology Assessment Procedure to Assess, Manage, and Minimize 
Software Safety Risk. Department of Defense and National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration, 2005. 
Homberger, Cheyne, Marc Austin, and Donald York. “System Readiness 
– A Look Beyond TRAs.” NDIA. October 2017. 
Austin, Marc, Cheyne Homberger, George Polacek, Erin Doolittle, Virginia 
Ahalt, and Donald York. “Using Bayesian Networks to Validate 
Technology Readiness Assessments of Systems.” 15th Annual 
Conference on Systems Engineering Research (CSER), Redondo Beach, 
CA, March 2017. 
Katz, Daniel, Shahram Sarkani, Thomas Mazzuchi, and Edmund Conrow. 
“The Relationship of Technology and Design Maturity to DOD Weapon 
System Cost Change and Schedule Change During Engineering and 
Manufacturing Development.” Systems Engineering 18, no. 1 (2015):,1–
15. 
Kramer, Corinne, Jay Mandelbaum, Michael May, and David Sparrow. 
Training Briefing for the Conduct of Technology Readiness Assessments. 
Institute for Defense Analyses, IDA Document D-4029. Washington, D.C., 
April 2009. 
Mankins, John C. “Technology Readiness and Risk Assessments: A New 
Approach.” Acta Astronautica, no. 65, Issues 9-10 (November-December 
2009): 1208-1215. 
Mankins, John C. “Technology Readiness Assessments: A 
Retrospective.” Acta Astronaut, no. 65, Issues 9–10 (November-
December 2009): 1216–1223. 
Mankins, John C. “Approaches to Strategic Research and Technology 
Analysis and Road Mapping,” Acta Astronaut. no. 51, Issues. 1–9 (July-
November 2002): 3–21. 
Mazzuchi, Thomas, Nazanin Azizian, Shahram Sarkani, and David Rico. 
“A Framework for Evaluating Technology Readiness, System Quality, and 
=== page 144 ===
 
References 
 
 
 
 
Page 139 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Program Performance of U.S. DOD Acquisitions.” Systems Engineering 
14, no. 4, (2011): 410–427. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Office of Space and 
Technology. Mankins, John C. Technology Readiness Levels: A White 
Paper. April 6,1995. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Office of the Chief 
Engineer. NASA Space Flight Program and Project Management 
Requirements (NPR 7120.5E). Effective date: August 14, 2012. 
Expiration date: August 14, 2020. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. NASA Systems 
Engineering Handbook. Washington, D.C., December 2007. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Procedural Requirement 
(NPR) 7123.1B Appendix E (Technology Readiness Levels). Effective 
date: April 18, 2013. Expiration date: December 18, 2019. 
Olechowski, Alison, Steven Eppinger, and Nitin Joglekar. “Technology 
Readiness Levels at 40: A Study of the State-of-the-Art Use, Challenges, 
and Opportunities.” Portland International Conference on Management of 
Engineering and Technology, August 2015. 
Sauser, Brian, Ryan Gove, Eric Forbes, and Jose Ramirez-Marquez. 
“Integration Maturity Metrics: Development of an Integration Readiness 
Level.” Information Knowledge Systems Management , no. 9 (2010): 17-
46. 
Sauser, Brian, Jose Ramirez-Marquez, Romulo Magnaye, and Weiping 
Tan. “A Systems Approach to Expanding the Technology Readiness 
Level within Defense Acquisition.” International Journal of Defense 
Acquisition Management, no. 1 (2008): 39-58. 
Sauser, Brian, Jose Ramirez-Marquez, Dinesh Verma, and Ryan Gove. 
“From TRL to SRL: The Concept of Systems Readiness Levels”. 
Conference on Systems Engineering Research, Los Angeles, CA, April 
2006. 
Tomaschek, Katharina, Alison Olechowski, Steven Eppinger, and Nitin 
Joglekar. “A Survey of Technology Readiness Level Users.” 26th Annual 
INCOSE International Symposium. Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 2016. 
=== page 145 ===
 
References 
 
 
 
 
Page 140 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Management. Technology 
Readiness Assessment Guide. Washington, D.C., September 15, 2011. 
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Environmental Management. 
Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA)/Technology Maturation Plan 
(TMP) Process Implementation Guide. Washington, D.C.: March 2008. 
York, Donald. “A Practical Guide to Determine the Readiness of Systems. 
Innovative Methods, Metrics and Tools for the Systems Engineer.” 
Tutorial, 29th Annual INCOSE International Symposium, Orlando, FL 20-
25 July 2019. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, “NASA Space Flight 
Program and Project Management Requirements” (NPR 7120.5E). Office 
of the Chief Engineer. Effective date: Aug 2012. Expiration date: Aug 
2017). 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration. “NASA Systems 
Engineering Handbook”, 2007. 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Procedural Requirement 
(NPR) 7123.1B Appendix E (Technology Readiness Levels). Effective 
date: April 2013. Expiration date: Dec 2019. 
Olechowski, A., S. Eppinger, and N. Joglekar. “Technology Readiness 
Levels at 40: A Study of the State-of-the-Art Use, Challenges, and 
Opportunities”. Portland International Conference on Management of 
Engineering and Technology. Management of the Technology Age. Aug 
2015. 
Sauser, Brian, Ryan Gove, Eric Forbes, and Jose Ramirez-Marquez. 
“Integration maturity metrics: Development of an integration readiness 
level”. Inf. Knowledge Systems Management, vol. 9. 2010. 
Sauser, Brian, J. Ramirez-Marquez, R. Magnaye, and W. Tan. “A 
Systems Approach to Expanding the Technology Readiness Level within 
Defense Acquisition,” International Journal of Defense Acquisition 
Management. 2008. 
Sauser, Brian, R. Gove, D. Verma, and J. E. Ramirez-Marquez. “From 
TRL to SRL: The Concept of Systems Readiness Levels”. Conference on 
Systems Engineering Research. 2006. 
=== page 146 ===
 
References 
 
 
 
 
Page 141 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
Systems Engineering, 27th Annual INCOSE International Symposium, 
Adelaide, Australia, July 2017. 
Tomaschek, K., A. Olechowski, S. Eppinger, and N. Joglekar. “A Survey 
of Technology Readiness Level Users”. INCOSE International 
Symposium. Edinburgh, UK. 2016. 
United States. Department of Defense, “Technology Readiness 
Assessment (TRA) Guidance”. Defense for Research and Engineering. 
2011. 
United States. Department of Defense. “Technology Readiness 
Assessment (TRA) Deskbook”, Defense Research and Engineering. 
2009. 
United States. Department of Defense. “Technology Readiness 
Assessment (TRA) Deskbook”, Defense for Science and Technology. 
2005. 
United States. Department of Defense. “Technology Readiness 
Assessment (TRA) Deskbook”, Defense for Science and Technology. 
2003. 
United States. Department of Energy, “Technology Readiness 
Assessment Guide”. Office of Management. September 2011. 
United States. Department of Energy, “Technology Readiness 
Assessment (TRA)/Technology Maturation Plan (TMP) Process 
Implementation Guide”. Office of Environmental Management. 2008. 
York, D, et al., “Using Bayesian Networks to Validate Technology 
Readiness Assessments of Systems”, Annual Conference on Systems 
Engineering Research, Mar 2017. 
  
=== page 147 ===
 
References 
 
 
 
 
Page 142 GAO-20-48G  TRA Guide 
This section lists credit and copyright information for images and graphics 
in this product, as appropriate, when that information was not listed 
adjacent to the image or graphic. 
Front cover clockwise (starting from top): 
Solar farm. Source: National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
Solar Probe. Source: (c) 2012 Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics 
Lab (artist depiction) 
Baggage screen. Source: TSA. 
Patriot Advanced Capability-3 missile. Source: US Army 
Image Sources 
(102265)) 
=== page 148 ===
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative 
arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional 
responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the 
federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public 
funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, 
recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed 
oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government 
is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is 
through our website. Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly 
released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can also subscribe to 
GAO’s email updates to receive notification of newly posted products. 
 
The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and 
distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether 
the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering 
information is posted on GAO’s website, https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.  
Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or  
TDD (202) 512-2537. 
Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard, 
Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information. 
Connect with GAO on Facebook, Flickr, Twitter, and YouTube. 
Subscribe to our RSS Feeds or Email Updates. Listen to our Podcasts. 
Visit GAO on the web at https://www.gao.gov. 
Contact FraudNet: 
Website: https://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7700 
Orice Williams Brown, Managing Director, WilliamsO@gao.gov, (202) 512-4400, 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125, 
Washington, DC 20548 
Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov, (202) 512-4800 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149  
Washington, DC 20548 
James-Christian Blockwood, Managing Director, spel@gao.gov, (202) 512-4707 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7814, 
Washington, DC 20548 
GAO’s Mission 
Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony 
Order by Phone 
Connect with GAO 
To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs 
Congressional 
Relations 
Public Affairs 
Strategic Planning and 
External Liaison 
Please Print on Recycled Paper.
=== page 149 ===
Assessment Guide
