=== page 1 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Science and Global Security, 12:1–67, 2004
Copyright C© Taylor & Francis Inc.
ISSN: 0892-9882 print
DOI: 10.1080/08929880490464649
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic
Missile Defense
Dean A. Wilkening
Boost-phase ballistic missile defense is alluring because rocket boosters are easy to
detect and track, they are relatively vulnerable due to the large axial loads on a missile
under powered ﬂight, the entire payload (single or multiple warheads and midcourse
penetration aids) may be destroyed in a single shot, and countermeasures to defeat boost-
phase defense are more difﬁcult to devise than for midcourse ballistic missile defenses.
Moreover, if intercepted several seconds before booster burnout, the debris will land
well short of the target area, although collateral damage to other territory is a serious
concern.
On the other hand, boost-phase ballistic missile defense is technically challenging
because the intercept timelines are very short (1–3 minutes for theater-range ballis-
tic missiles and 3–5 minutes for intercontinental range missiles) and missile boosters
are accelerating targets, thus complicating the design of homing kinetic-kill vehicles
(KKVs). This article examines the technical feasibility and nominal capability of one
type of boost-phase defense, namely, airborne boost-phase intercept (ABI). Airborne
laser systems are not examined here.1 This article concludes that ABI should be techni-
cally achievable within the next decade and that airborne platforms offer some unique
advantages, especially for theater ballistic missile defense, that warrant their serious
consideration in future U.S. missile defense architectures.
The advantages of boost-phase ballistic missile defense animated President
Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative. However, unlike boost-phase defense
against Russian ICBMs, boost-phase defense against emerging ballistic-missile
states does not necessarily require space-based weapons due to their small
Received 11 June 2003; accepted 17 December 2003.
Address correspondence to Dean A. Wilkening, Encina Hall, Stanford University, Stan-
ford, CA 94305. E-mail: wilkening@stanford.edu
Dean A. Wilkening, Center for International Security and Cooperation, Stanford Uni-
versity, Stanford, CA.
1
=== page 2 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
2 Wilkening
geographic size. Ground, naval, and airborne platforms carrying boost-phase
interceptor missiles with intercept ranges on the order of 400 to 700 km can
get close enough to get an effective shot. This is important because, while ter-
restrial boost-phase systems may be effective against ICBMs launched from
small states such as North Korea, they would not be effective against ICBMs
launched from large countries such as Russia and China, or against submarine-
launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) launched from the open oceans, for the
simple reason that they cannot get close enough to all possible Russian or
Chinese launch locations to pose a realistic threat. Consequently they would
not provoke the kind of negative response from Russia or China that one
would expect with space-based boost-phase defenses. In fact, terrestrial boost-
phase defenses pose little threat to the strategic forces of any of the ﬁve ma-
jor nuclear powers, thus creating possibilities for collaboration between these
states.
Boost-phase intercept systems require a sensor architecture for rapid tar-
get detection and tracking, KKVs designed to intercept accelerating ballistic
missile targets, interceptor missiles to launch these KKVs at high speeds,
and launch platforms to carry the interceptors. Direct collision between the
KKV and ballistic missile body destroys the booster, thus rapidly terminating
its thrust and possibly destroying the warhead(s) as the booster collapses —
although the latter cannot be proved. Consequently, from a defense conserva-
tive perspective, one should assume that the payload could be viable. To ensure
that the ballistic missile debris, possibly including a live warhead, cannot reach
defended territory, intercepts must occur before the payload has sufﬁcient speed
to reach this territory typically several seconds to several tens of seconds before
booster burnout, depending on the target missile’s trajectory.
Soon after a ballistic missile is launched, the sensor architecture detects the
event and begins to track the target to obtain aﬁring solution for the interceptor
missile. Rapid launch detection and tracking maximizes the interceptor ﬂight
time and, hence, the intercept range. Initially, the interceptor and its KKV
are guided using in-ﬂight target updates from external sensors. As soon as the
KKV reaches an altitude at which its multi-spectral seeker can begin to operate
(above approximately 80 km), it should be able to track the target missile ’s
bright plume. When the KKV approaches to within approximately 100 km of
its target (about 10 seconds prior to intercept), the KKV sensors should be
able to discriminate the missile hard body from the rocket exhaust plume. An
onboard laser imaging, detection and ranging (LIDAR) system would help with
the plume-missile hard body track handoff as well as provide accurate range
information to improve KKV guidance allowing the aimpoint on the target to
be located with an accuracy of approximately 50 cm.2
=== page 3 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 3
The desired speed and mass of the KKV determines the size of the intercep-
tor missile and, hence, the feasible launch platforms (satellites, aircraft, ships,
or ground-based launchers). ABI speeds around 5 km/sec are desirable for both
theater and national missile defense. Slower speeds produce short intercept
ranges, thus increasing the number of ABI platforms required to cover a par-
ticular country and, hence, the system cost. Two-stage missiles with speeds
between 5–6 km/sec and masses below 1,500 kg can be designed with current
technology. Larger airborne missiles could be designed, but they would not ﬁt
easily aboard existing heavy bombers or other large aircraft, much less ﬁghter
aircraft or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).
The analysis of boost-phase intercept systems is complex because of the in-
terdependence of different elements in the system, thus requiring design itera-
tions. This analysis strives to be conservative with respect to ABI performance
estimates, yet includes systems that are not in existence today but could be
deployed within a decade if they signiﬁcantly impact the effectiveness of boost-
phase missile defense, for example, a notional space-based infrared sensor sim-
ilar to the Space-Based Infra-Red System-High Earth Orbit (SBIRS-High) and
powerful airborne X-band radars. The elements of an airborne boost-phase in-
tercept system are examined in detail in this analysis, along with the nomi-
nal ABI capability against theater-range and intercontinental-range ballistic
missiles. Ballistic missile target characteristics are clearly important for deter-
mining ABI effectiveness. Appendix A provides technical details for the ballistic
missile targets examined in this study.
SENSOR ARCHITECTURE
Boost-phase intercept requires prompt launch detection and rapid, accurate
tracking to launch and guide the interceptor in ﬂight until the KKV can home
autonomously on the target. While initial detection and tracking can come from
infrared or radar sensors, combining both creates a more robust architecture
because it helps eliminate false alarms and makes simple booster decoys more
difﬁcult to build because they must mimic radar and optical signatures. Figure 1
illustrates these sensor options. Although detailed sensor architecture designs
are quite complicated, their basic limitations, especially with respect to rapid
launch detection and tracking, can be understood by examining the physics of
each sensor type.
Infrared Detection and Tracking
Passive infrared systems can detect missile plumes with reasonable accuracy
from a distance of thousands of kilometers and, hence, can detect ballistic
=== page 4 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
4 Wilkening
Figure 1: Schematic sensor architecture.
missile launches globally from high-earth or geosynchronous orbits. Space-
based and airborne infrared sensors may both be attractive, the former because
of their global coverage and the latter because of their high accuracy.3 However,
passive infrared sensors require triangulation from multiple sensors to obtain
an accurate track because range information is not available.4
Infrared detection and tracking ranges depend on the infrared signal emit-
ted by the target or the reﬂectance of the target for LIDAR systems, the diameter
of the optics, and the minimal detectable signal of the focal plane array, which
is a function of the noise in the sensor and signal clutter returns from other ob-
jects (e.g., clouds) in the sensor’s ﬁeld of view. Sensor noise is determined by the
detector dark current (which is a sensitive function of its temperature) and by
blackbody radiation from any warm surfaces in the optical path. It is measured
in terms of a Noise Equivalent Intensity (NEI). The precision with which an
infrared sensor can determine the missile booster position is determined by the
diffraction limit of the optics or the pixel dimensions of the focal plane array,
whichever is larger, unless one invokes sub-pixel resolution techniques.
The infrared signal from a rocket plume is a complex function of the altitude
of the booster, the engine thrust, and the type of propellant. The infrared sig-
nature is produced by optical transitions from exited states of the combustion
products— principally water, carbon dioxide, and carbon monoxide. In addition,
liquid-propellant boosters produce soot due to the fuel-rich mixtures used to
optimize their speci ﬁc impulse. When heated, soot adds blackbody radiation
=== page 5 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 5
to the plume’s signature. Similarly, solid-propellant boosters often have metal
oxides (e.g., aluminum oxide) added to improve their speci ﬁc impulse. These
solid particles are ejected from the nozzle upon combustion and, like soot, add
blackbody radiation to the plume.
As a missile rises in the atmosphere, unburned fuel and combustion prod-
ucts like carbon monoxide and molecular hydrogen continue to burn when
mixed with atmospheric oxygen — referred to as “afterburning.” The infrared
intensity from large intercontinental ballistic missile plumes is approximately
1–10 MW/sr-µm at their peak intensity, that is, when the missile is at altitudes
below 40 km. When the missile ’s forward speed is close to the exhaust veloc-
ity of the combustion products, mixing with atmospheric oxygen occurs more
slowly and, hence, the “afterburning” signature drops signiﬁcantly, leading to
a “trough”region in the plume intensity. The“trough”region is typically two to
three orders of magnitude less intense than the “afterburning” region and oc-
curs when the missile is at an altitude of approximately 40 km to 60 km. As the
missile continues to accelerate, the relative speed of the exhaust plume and the
surrounding air again becomes appreciable and the plume signature increases
due to more effective mixing and, hence, combustion of the exhaust products.
At high altitudes, the oxygen concentration in the atmosphere becomes too low
to support signiﬁcant afterburning and the plume intensity drops again. At al-
titudes above 100 km the plume expands to such an extent that it often exceeds
the ﬁeld of view of a single sensor pixel, causing a further drop in apparent
signal intensity. Staging events also reduce the observed signal because of the
smaller thrust for second and third stage rocket motors. Eventually, the plume
signature drops to that of the “intrinsic core,”which is the infrared signal one
observes directly behind the nozzle from heated exhaust products expanding
into the vacuum of outer space. The “intrinsic core” is two to three orders of
magnitude less intense than the peak “afterburning” signature. Typical in-
frared intensities for the intrinsic core for ICBM-class engines are on the order
of several hundred to several thousand Watts per steradian per micron.5
Infrared ballistic missile early-warning satellites such as the Defense Sup-
port Program (DSP) and its future replacement, SBIRS-High, are candidates for
missile detection and tracking. The Space-Based Infra-Red System-Low Earth
Orbit (SBIRS-Low) is not expected to play a signi ﬁcant role in boost-phase
defense because its multi-spectral optical system, particularly its long-wave
infrared sensor, is designed to accurately track objects against the cold back-
ground of outer space and, hence, cannot observe missiles until relatively late
in their boost phase. Moreover, due to signiﬁcant cost overruns, it is not clear
when SBIRS-Low will be deployed, if ever.
DSP operates in the 2.7µm water absorption band and has a pixel footprint
of approximately 1 km × 1 km on the surface of the earth. This infrared band
=== page 6 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
6 Wilkening
was selected because this wavelength is strongly attenuated in the atmosphere,
thereby greatly reducing the background signal from spurious infrared sources
and clutter returns on or near the surface of the earth. In this band, scattered
light from high-altitude clouds is the dominant source of clutter. However, the
infrequent DSP revisit rate (approximately 10 sec) introduces detection delays
and, therefore, makes this sensor unattractive for booster tracking.
Detecting the launch of a large rocket using space-based infrared sensors
is relatively easy for high-thrust ICBM and theater-range ballistic missileﬁrst
stages. For example, a 300 km-range Scud B missile has the same thrust and,
hence, the same intrinsic core intensity as a Minuteman III third-stage rocket
motor, that is, about 200 W/sr in the 2.6 –2.8 µm band. Such a plume would
produce a signal-to-noise ratio of 1 at geosynchronous orbit for a sensor with
30 cm diameter optics and a NEI of 1 × 10−14 W/cm2, that is, a signal that is
detectable but requires modest integration times to achieve reasonable detec-
tion probabilities.6 However, the signal from a Scud B or Scud C missile as
it passes through the afterburning region is hundreds to thousands of times
brighter than the intrinsic core and, hence, can be detected by space-based in-
frared sensors at geosynchronous altitudes, as in fact occurred with DSP during
Operation Desert Storm.
This analysis assumes that a sensor like SBIR-High will be deployed
to support boost-phase ballistic missile defense. The capability of a notional
space-based infrared system like SBIRS-High has been examined in a recent
American Physical Society (APS) study.7 This detector consists of a 30 cm tele-
scope with a HgCdTe focal plane array that stares at 1/24 of the Earth’s surface
every 33 msec, thus scanning the entire surface in less than one second unless
it focuses intentionally on a narrow region of high interest. The APS study as-
sumed that this sensor operated in one of the infrared atmospheric windows
(e.g., 2.0–2.5 µm or 3.5–5 µm) as opposed to an infrared absorption band like
DSP, thereby allowing the sensor to see down to the Earth’s surface under clear
conditions, witha1k m × 1 km pixel footprint at the Earth’s surface.
Under these circumstances, the latest time at which a notional space-based
infrared sensor can detect missile boosters is determined by the presence of op-
tically thick clouds. The APS study concluded that large ballistic missile plumes
could be detected with high con ﬁdence by a space-based infrared sensor oper-
ating in one of the atmospheric windows once the missile reaches an altitude
of approximately 7 km.8 This sets an upper limit on the time delay from mis-
sile launch to ﬁrst detection. Table 1 shows the time it takes for the missiles
examined in this study to reach an altitude of 7 km along lofted trajectories.
Lofted trajectories have been chosen because, although they can be detected
a few seconds earlier, they require more time to develop an accurate track
=== page 7 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Table 1: SBIR/radar ballistic missile detection and tracking times.
Time to Time to track Total launch delay Total interceptor
detecta (sec) (sec) (sec) flight time (sec)Boost Burnout
time altitude SBIR Airborne SBIR Airborne SBIR Airborne TBBOb SBIR Airborne
Missile (sec) (km) (1 km) radar (1 km) radar (1 km) radar (sec) (1 km) radar
North Korean launches
Scud B 61 23–31 33 14c 10 5 43 19 8 10 34
Scud C 85 26–60 37 21c 13 5 50 26 9 26 50
No Dong 95 42–88 35 21c 13 5 48 26 10 37 59
Taepo Dong 1 165 110–170 43 27c 13 5 56 32 13 96 120
Taepo Dong 2 193 180–240 39 27c 13 5 52 32 15 126 146
290 sec ICBM 290 185–445 52 44c 13 5 65 49 20 205 221
240 sec ICBM 240 135–440 39 30c 9 5 48 35 17 175 188
180 sec ICBM 180 75–370 32 24c 5 5 37 29 14 129 137
Iranian launches
Shahab 3 95 65–75 34 21c 11 5 45 26 10 40 59
Shahab 4 165 125–170 43 32 14 5 57 37 13 95 115
Shahab 5 199 180–280 40 45 13 5 53 50 15 131 134
290 sec ICBM 290 185–395 52 60 14 5 66 65 20 204 205
240 sec ICBM 240 145–395 39 45 9 5 48 50 17 175 173
180 sec ICBM 180 85–325 32 37 5 5 37 42 14 129 124
aDetermined by when the missile reaches 7 km altitude for space-based infrared sensors and when the missile passes into the radar
fan (0.42◦ grazing angle) and has a Doppler shift above 150 km/hr for the airborne radar.bIntercepts are assumed to occur at a time before burn out (TBBO) equal to 5 percent of the missile’sboost time plus 5 seconds.cAssuming the airborne radar is within 400 km of the launch site.
7
=== page 8 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
8 Wilkening
using space-based infrared sensors and because ABIs have shorter intercept
ranges against them due to the need to climb to higher intercept altitudes.
Therefore, when these factors are included, lofted trajectories represent worst-
case trajectories for boost-phase intercept.
After detection, it takes some time for space-based infrared sensors to track
targets with sufﬁcient accuracy before an ABI can be launched. Initial target
tracking is done while the missile passes through the “afterburning” region.
The time it takes to develop an accurate track depends on the resolution of the
sensor, its frame rate, and the trajectory of the ballistic missile as viewed by the
space-based infrared sensor. In particular, the target heading must be known
with sufﬁcient accuracy to know that the missile is on a threatening azimuth
and so the KKV can remove residual errors in the predicted intercept point.
In general, the more fuel a KKV carries, the larger the heading errors it can
accommodate. However, adding fuel to compensate for large heading errors is
not an attractive approach because of the increased KKV weight.
Different criteria can be postulated for target tracking. This analysis
assumes that the target must appear threatening, that is, heading toward
territory to be defended, and that the target heading must be known well
enough so as not to impact seriously the KKV divert fuel requirement. To
appear threatening, it is assumed the target missile must travel a minimum of
two pixels (2–3 km from the original point of detection for a 1 km × 1 km pixel
footprint) to determine the approximate target heading before ABI launch,
that is, the target heading must be determined to within approximately ±15
degrees.9 This time is longer for lofted trajectories because the horizontal
component of the missile’s velocity is lower.
In addition, this analysis assumes that the ABI launch would be further
delayed if the track heading is not known well enough so that after the ABI
booster burns out (i.e., 20 sec after ABI launch), the KKV has to expend more
than 10 percent (i.e., 0.2 km/sec) of its divert budget to compensate for residual
heading errors.10 This leaves the majority of the KKV fuel to compensate for
target maneuvers during its boost phase, which drives the KKV divert budget.
The lateral divert required to correct for initial heading errors can be provided
by the ABI rocket motor during its boost phase using in- ﬂight target updates
at little expense in ABI speed. 11 For the missile trajectories examined in this
study, the 2-pixel requirement always dominated, that is, delaying the ABI
launch until the target had traveled two pixels down range always resulted in
less than 0.2 km/sec of KKV divert to correct for residual heading errors after
the 20-second ABI boost phase ends.
The time delays shown in Table 1 are based on lofted North Korean and
Iranian missile trajectories because they exhibit the longest track delays. 12
Depressed and minimum energy trajectories have longer target detection
=== page 9 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 9
delays because it takes longer to reach an altitude of 7 km along these trajec-
tories, however, their tracking delays are shorter because the horizontal com-
ponent of velocity is higher, which compensates for the detection delay thereby
allowing the ABI to be launched several seconds sooner.
In some cases the time to track is shorter than ﬁve seconds. This analysis
assumes that ﬁve seconds is a lower bound on the time to track for any sensor
because several seconds will be needed for command and control decisions by
local commanders (insufﬁcient time exists to request launch authorization from
higher authorities) and for communication delays between the sensor platform
and the ABI launch platform.
The Scud B and the 180-second solid-propellant ICBM are the two target
missiles with the most stressing timelines of the missiles examined in this
study. A space-based infrared sensor with 1 km pixel dimensions should sufﬁce
to produce tracking times close to the minimum value for a 180-second burn
time ICBM (see Table 1). However, faster tracking times for the Scud B missile
would require higher resolution sensors. Sensor resolution would have to be
reduced to approximately 0.5 km pixel footprints to ensure that most of the
missiles examined in this study could be tracked within less than 5 seconds
by a space-based infrared sensor. Whether the increased cost, narrowerﬁeld of
view, and longer scan times associated with such a sensor are acceptable can
be determined only by conducting an overall system tradeoff study, which is
beyond the scope of this analysis.
Note that booster typing would be very difﬁcult soon after launch detection
because staging events will not have occurred yet and the target’s acceleration
proﬁle cannot be determined with sufﬁcient accuracy from crude track data to
determine the missile type, despite the fact that solid-propellant ICBMs have
shorter tracking times than liquid-propellant missiles. Even with accurate
acceleration proﬁles, as might be provided by radar or LIDAR, booster typing
is challenging because medium-range ballistic missiles (MRBMs) and ICBMs
can have similar acceleration pro ﬁles early in their boost phase, as indicated
in Figures A4 and A5. Optical signatures might be exploited, but they may not
be sufﬁciently distinct to discriminate booster types. Optical signatures might
provide some information on whether the missile burns liquid or solid fuel — a
factor that determines the approximate burn time — but this information
too may be unreliable at the time of ABI launch. Consequently, one would
be committing an ABI against a target with a bright plume without much
knowledge of whether the target is a liquid- or solid-propellant, medium-range
or intercontinental-range ballistic missile.
The ﬁnal burnout points for theater-range and intercontinental-range bal-
listic missiles can vary by several hundred kilometers. Therefore, if one doesn’t
know the booster type, several ABIs may have to be launched to guard against
=== page 10 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
10 Wilkening
mistaking a theater-range missile for an ICBM and vice versa. In addition, bal-
listic missile boosters can maneuver in ﬂight, for example, involving lofted or
depressed trajectory maneuvers, plane changes, general energy management
maneuvers (used by solid-propellant ballistic missiles to adjust their range), or
intentional booster maneuvers to avoid intercept. Such maneuver can change
the predicted intercept point by several hundred kilometers for ICBM targets
even if the missile type is known and, hence, drive the KKV divert requirement
because they must be compensated for entirely by the kill vehicle after the ABI
booster burns out.13 If missile boosters do not maneuver but rather ﬂy along
predictable trajectories, with sensor noise as the dominant source of trajectory
error, then the predicted intercept point can be estimated to within a few kilo-
meters or perhaps tens of kilometers, for most ballistic missiles shortly after
the target is detected.14
The total ABI launch delay and the time remaining for ABI ﬂight is also
shown in Table 1. The total launch delay is simply the sum of the detection
and tracking time delays. The ABI ﬂight time is equal to the target missile
boost time, minus the launch delay, minus the time before booster burnout
that intercept should be achieved. Ballistic missile boost times can vary by up
to 5 percent from their nominal values due to pressure and thermal effects
that alter the fuel ﬂow rate for liquid-propellant motors and the burn rate
for solid-propellant grains. Thus, to be con ﬁdent that an ABI can intercept
its target before the rocket motor burns out, the intercept time before burn
out (TBBO) should be at least 5 percent of the target ’s nominal boost time.
In addition, to ensure that the debris lands well short of the intended target,
ballistic missiles should be intercepted about 5 seconds prior to their nominal
burn time. This causes the debris to land at a range about 15%–25% less than
the missile’s intended range (see Figure A6). If North Korean or Iranian ICBMs
are intercepted 5 seconds before burnout, the debris would land in northern
Canada (see Figures A7 and A8), well away from populated areas in Canada
and the United States (except for North Korean trajectories that pass over
Alaska).
Radar Detection and Tracking
Radar provides all-weather tracking and very accurate range measurements.
Airborne radar, in particular, can provide early ballistic missile detection, if
the radar is approximately 400 km or less from the missile launch site because,
at this range, an airborne radar ﬂying at 12 km (40,000 ft) altitude has line
of sight to the ground. Targets beyond this range must climb high enough to
be seen over the radar horizon. Land and sea-based radar are less attractive,
=== page 11 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 11
unless they are located very close to the launch site, because target missiles
take too much time to rise above the radar horizon to provide timely detection.
For example, it takes between 70 –110 seconds for targets to become visible
to surface-based radar at a range of 600 km, depending on the missile type,
the missile’s trajectory and the radar grazing angle. However, surface radar
can provide in-ﬂight target update information to guide the KKV in ﬂight. If
effective radar jammers are deployed that eliminate radar range information,
then the defense would have to deploy two or more radars to track targets using
only angle measurements.
Radar can either use space-based infrared detection to cue the radar, thus
avoiding a large search solid angle, or they can operate in stand-alone mode
where the radar conducts a wide-area search along a section of the horizon to
obtain initial detection. Clearly, if a radar is cued from a space-based infrared
sensor, radar detection would occur after infrared detection. Since ﬂight time
is of the essence for boost-phase intercept, this analysis examines the potential
for airborne radar to provide earlier detection times, thereby reducing the ABI
launch delay and increasing the ABI ﬂight time. Hence, the radars examined
here are designed to operate in wide-area surveillance mode.
Airborne radar use range gates and Doppler processing to sort clutter re-
turns from vehicle traf ﬁc and Doppler shifted returns from the earth ’s sur-
face. This analysis assumes that a target’s radial (Doppler) speed must exceed
150 km/hr before detection can occur. As a consequence, targets go undetected
until their Doppler speed exceeds this value and target tracks are dropped when
the target trajectory is nearly perpendicular to the radar line of sight. Target
missiles launched at ranges closer than the radar horizon can be detected as
soon as their Doppler signal exceeds 150 km/hr. However, accurate tracking
typically cannot occur until the target is about half the radar elevation beam
width above the horizon, as discussed below.
The airborne radar detection times listed in Table 1 have been computed by
considering a range of launch locations throughout North Korea and Iran for
different missile types, then selecting the worst-case time delay associated with
the radar that is in the most favorable location for observing the target. This
usually was an airborne radar near the DMZ for North Korean launches and
varied for launches from Iran. In general, depressed trajectories have detection
times several seconds longer than those listed in Table 1, depending on the exact
launch proﬁle for the ﬁrst stage rocket motor (which may not be much different
for depressed and lofted trajectories). However, lofted trajectories create worst-
case intercept geometries because the higher intercept altitude decreases the
ABI intercept range. Hence, the airborne radar detection times shown in Table 1
are for lofted trajectories.
=== page 12 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
12 Wilkening
The maximum radar detection range (Rmax), for a radar operating in surveil-
lance mode, is given by the radar range equation,
R4
max = Pave Aeσε i (n)
4πkTn(S/N)1 Ls
ts
/Omega1,
where Pave is the average radiated power, Ae is the effective antenna aperture,
σ is the target radar cross section, εi (n) is the efﬁciency with which the radar
integrates n pulses, k is the Boltzmann constant (1.38 × 10−23 J/deg), Tn is the
radar antenna noise temperature, (S/N)1 is the signal-to-noise ratio required to
detect the target with a speciﬁed probability and false alarm rate with one pulse,
Ls includes various loss factors associated with the radar and the propagation
path, and ts is the time required to scan a solid angle/Omega1.15 Thus, in surveillance
mode, radar capability is determined largely by the power-aperture product
and the time required to scan one steradian in solid angle. The solid angle
is determined by the azimuth to be scanned — assumed to be 90 degrees in
this analysis— and the height of the scanned sector— assumed to be one beam
height. The scan time per steradian is determined by n/( fp /Omega10), where n is the
number of pulses integrated for detection in surveillance mode, fp is the radar
pulse repetition frequency and /Omega10 is the solid angle of the radar main-lobe
beam.
Liquid- and solid-propellant ICBMs are assumed to have a minimum radar
cross section (i.e., nose-on) at 10 GHz of approximately 0.5 m 2 and 0.1 m 2,
respectively.16 However, within a few tens of seconds after launch most missiles
are 20–40 degrees from vertical and, hence, their radar cross sections will be
larger. In addition, the aft radar cross section is larger than the nose-on cross
section. Hence, if the missileﬂies away from the radar, as is the case with North
Korean ICBM launches viewed by an airborne radar south of the DMZ, it will
have a larger radar cross section. This analysis assumes a minimum radar cross
section of 0.5 m2 for initial launch detection. The radar cross section for tracking
is lower, especially after staging events, and is assumed to be 0.1 m 2 and 0.5
m2 for solid and liquid propellant ICBMs, respectively. To obtain reasonable
tracking ranges, assumed here to be at least 650 km, additional radar pulses
must be integrated.
Table 2 gives the parameters for several notional radars examined in
this study. The ground-based radar (GBR) is similar in design to the THAAD
Ground-Based Radar but with a power-aperture product about twice as large
to obtain sufﬁcient detection ranges and fast scan times. The sea-based radar
(SBR) is similar to the Aegis SPY-1B radar with an increase in power-aperture
product of about 70 percent. Finally, the notional airborne X-band radar (not
=== page 13 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 13
Table 2: Radar parameters and estimated performance a.
Ground-based Sea-based Airborne
X-band radar S-band radar X-band radar
Parameter
Operating frequency (GHz) 9.5 3.3 10
Pulse repetition frequencyb (Hz) 45 17 30
Total average power (kW) 120 100 120
Antenna height (m) 2.0 3.85 2.0
Antenna width (m) 4.6 3.65 4.0
Physical aperture (m2) 9.2 14.1 8.0
Effective aperture (m2) 6.0 12.0 5.2
Power-aperture product (kWm2) 720 1,200 624
Receiving gain (with weighting) 75,400 18,200 72,600
Weighted azimuth beam 0.44 1.60 0.48
width (deg)
Weighted elevation beam 1.01 1.52 0.96
width (deg)
Azimuth scan sector (deg) 90 90 90
Search solid angle (sr) 0.0278 0.0415 0.0264
Beam solid angle (sr) 1.36E-04 7.38E-04 1.41E-04
Noise temperature ( ◦K) 500 500 650
System and atmospheric 19.5 18.4 19.2
losses (dB)
Performancec
Time to transit elev. beam d (sec) 8.8 13.2 16.8
Surveillance scan time (sec) 4.5 6.6 6.2
Pulses integrated for surveillance 1 2 1
Surveillance range: 0.5 m 2 585 730 590
target (km)
Track integration time (sec) 0.33 0.53 0.50
Pulses integrated for tracking 15 9 15
Tracking range: σ = 0.1/0.5 650/970 650/970 655/980
m2 (km)
aMany of these radar parameters come from the APS study, Boost-Phase Intercept Systems
for National Missile Defense , July 2003, Sections 10.2.3–10.2.5.bThe estimated pulse repetition frequency assumes that only a few pulses are integrated
in surveillance mode. In any case, the pulse repetition frequency cannot exceed 100 Hz to
avoid range ambiguities for a maximum detection range of 1,500 km.
cThe detection probability is assumed to be 0.90 with a false alarm probability of 10 −6,r e -
quiring a single-pulse signal-to-noise level of 20.8 dB. The cumulative detection probability is
0.99 for two scans.dThe maximum elevation rate for missile targets crossing the GBR, SBR, and ABR elevation
beams is 2 mrad/sec, 2 mrad/sec and 1 mrad/sec, respectively.
to be confused with the Airborne Warning And Control System, or AWACS,
S-band radar used for air defense) is designed with suf ﬁcient power-aperture
product to have long detection ranges and fast scan times. This airborne
radar (ABR) is a conformal array and essentially has the performance of an
airborne THAAD-like radar. X-band was chosen over S-band despite the in-
creased difﬁculty in achieving high transmit power and greater atmospheric
=== page 14 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
14 Wilkening
attenuation, because the beam can scan closer to the horizon, thus detecting
targets earlier.
The radars in Table 2 are designed to be powerful enough to scan 90 degrees
in azimuth in half the time it takes a target booster to transit the radar elevation
beam width, which for the missiles examined in this analysis is between 9 and
17 seconds.17 Short scan times also minimize the scan delay for initial target
detection, which arises because the radar may be scanning another part of
its surveillance volume when the target ﬁrst appears above the horizon. This
delay is, on average, half the surveillance scan time. The radar power-aperture
product is adjusted to obtain a probability of detection of 0.9 on each pass,
resulting in a cumulative detection probability of 0.99. This requires a single-
pulse signal-to-noise ratio of 20.8 dB for a false alarm rate of 10−6. The tracking
range for each radar is designed to be approximately 650 km and 1,000 km
against 0.1 m2 and 0.5 m2 targets, respectively, with a track integration time
between one-third and one-half of a second.
Radar track accuracy depends on the radar frequency, the dimensions of the
antenna, the radar signal-to-noise level, the degree to which the target radar
cross section ﬂuctuates, and propagation effects, especially when viewing tar-
gets close to the horizon. As a rule of thumb, angular track accuracies on the
order of one-tenth of the diffraction-limited beam width ( θb) can be achieved.
Multipath effects are the dominant source of error for low-angle tracking (i.e.,
for targets within 1.5 θb of the horizon). These errors can be reduced by us-
ing narrow beam widths (i.e., high radar frequencies and tall antennas) and
by sophisticated signal processing (e.g., high range resolution, frequency di-
versity, and off-axis tracking techniques). In general, low elevation angle track
errors on the order of 0.1 θb can be obtained without too much effort for targets
located at grazing angles at least 0.3 θb to 0.5θb above the horizon.18 This anal-
ysis assumes that the minimum grazing angle for accurate tracking is 0.5 θb.
Therefore, the X-band radars in Table 2 can track targets with an angular ac-
curacy of approximately 0.1 degrees, which translates into a position error of
approximately 1 km at a range of 600 km.
The range resolution, on the other hand, for modern tracking radar can be
on the order of a few meters, or less. Consequently, in a jamming-free environ-
ment, track accuracies on the order of tens of meters or better can be obtained
in the horizontal plane if multiple radars track the target. Vertical accuracies
would remain on the order of 1 km until the target climbs fairly high above the
horizon. If effective radar jamming is assumed on the part of the opponent, the
accuracy drops to approximately 1 km in all three dimensions. Therefore, in a
jamming-free environment, the radars in Table 2 could develop a track accu-
rate enough to launch an airborne interceptor within ﬁve seconds after initial
=== page 15 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 15
radar detection, including several seconds for command, control and commu-
nication time delays, because the target heading error can be determined to
within ±2 degrees in two seconds. Two seconds is chosen because it is assumed
that three out of four radar hits are required to establish a track. In a jamming
environment the radar tracking delay would be comparable to that fora1k m
pixel space-based infrared sensor. Such rapid tracking may seem optimistic,
however, it should be achievable if one designs the surveillance architecture
with rapid target detection and tracking in mind. Note that this leaves very
little time for human intervention in the ABI launch process — essentially a
simple “go-no go”decision on the part of a tactical commander. This may seem
risky, however, it is of less concern than one might think for a defensive system
brought to a high state of alert in the midst of a crisis, as argued below.
Figure 2 illustrates various boost-phase trajectories associated with
medium and long-range missiles launched from North Korea. The ICBM launch
Figure 2: Sensor coverage.
=== page 16 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
16 Wilkening
fans correspond to a 240-second liquid-propellant ICBM heading toward tar-
gets spread across the United States from the east to the west coasts (including
Alaska), with one outlying trajectory on the right-hand side heading toward
Hawaii. Each dot represents the ground track of the booster at 10-second in-
tervals. A 290-second liquid-propellant ICBM would have slightly longer boost-
phase tracks and a 180-second solid-propellant ICBM would have shorter boost-
phase tracks. The shorter boost-phase tracks (in gray) in Figure 2 represent
Scud B, Scud C, No Dong and Taepo Dong missiles. The circles indicate the
range from a radar location approximately 80 km south of the DMZ and an-
other 120 km off the coast of North Korea in the Sea of Japan. As one can
see, tracking ranges of 650 km are suf ﬁcient to support boost-phase intercept
against North Korea because the KKV homes autonomously during the last 100
km of its ﬂight (recall that the intercept occurs approximately 10 –20 seconds
before booster burnout, as indicated in Table 1).
Figure 3 illustrates the time it takes ground, naval, and airborne radars to
detect ICBMs launched from the western-most launch location in North Korea
(the worst-case) heading toward Chicago. The ground-based radar is assumed
to be located near Vladivostok and the naval radar is collocated with the air-
borne radar in the Sea of Japan. An airborne S-band radar (ABR-S) with similar
detection range and surveillance characteristics to the airborne X-band radar
Figure 3: Radar detection times for North Korean ICBMs.
=== page 17 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 17
(ABR-X) in Table 2 is also shown to make the point that X-band radar can
provide earlier detection times due to its lower grazing angle. Solid-propellant
ICBMs are detected earlier than slower liquid-propellant ICBMs, as one might
expect, because they enter the radar surveillance fan earlier and have higher
Doppler speeds. The airborne radars near the DMZ clearly have the shortest de-
tection times.19 An airborne radar over the Sea of Japan has the same favorable
viewing geometry but, for a trajectory heading toward Chicago, is limited by
the Doppler notch because the trajectory is nearly perpendicular to the radar’s
line of sight early in the missile’s ﬂight.
Figure 4 illustrates a similar radar surveillance picture for Iran. Three or
more radars must be present continuously to provide adequate coverage of hy-
pothetical Iranian ICBM launches, especially if the radar has only a 90-degree
azimuth search capability (the azimuth limitation is not illustrated in the ﬁg-
ure). Medium-range ballistic missiles, as illustrated by the short boost-phase
tracks (in gray) in Figure 4, require airborne radar ﬂying along the Iraq-Iran
border for adequate launch detection— clearly a difﬁcult proposition. Although
Figure 4: Radar coverage of Iran.
=== page 18 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
18 Wilkening
airborne radar appears to provide adequate coverage of Iran, this state is large
enough that the radar detection ranges are beyond the horizon and, hence,
slower (by about 15 seconds for ICBMs, as shown in Table 1) compared to sim-
ilar radar detection times from North Korea. In fact, they are a bit longer than
space-based infrared detection and tracking times. Consequently, space-based
infrared systems provide the best sensor architecture for Iran. Airborne radar
is an important adjunct to space-based detection and tracking over Iran, es-
pecially for theater-range missiles launched from sites around the periphery
where the viewing geometry is more favorable, assuming airborne radars have
access to adjacent airspace.
To summarize, space-based infrared sensors probably are the preferred sen-
sors for boost-phase detection and tracking, particularly for large countries such
as Iran. Sensors with 1 km footprints on the Earth’s surface should be sufﬁcient
for boost-phase detection and tracking, although 0.5 km footprints might be at-
tractive under some circumstances. Consequently, a sensor like SBIRS-High,
assuming it has characteristics similar to the notional space-based infrared sen-
sor examined here, should have high priority in any future boost-phase missile
defense architecture. Airborne X-band radar can achieve more rapid detection
and tracking in favorable geographies, thus leading to greater ABI intercept
ranges against small states like North Korea. In addition, as a second detection
phenomenology, it can reduce false alarms and make boost-phase decoys more
difﬁcult to construct when compared to a detection and tracking architecture
that depends solely on space-based infrared sensors. However, airborne radars
have limited endurance— approximately 8–12 hours on station, depending on
the scenario— thus requiring three to four aircraft to keep one airborne 24 hours
a day during a crisis. As a result, airborne radar is unattractive for continuous
peacetime surveillance. Ground-based and sea-based radar can produce accu-
rate target track data for in-ﬂight target updates to the ABI, but the curvature
of the earth limits their ability to detect targets soon after launch unless they
are very close to the launch location.
KINETIC KILL VEHICLE DESIGN
Kinetic kill vehicles for boost-phase missile defense involve greater technical
challenges than KKVs for midcourse ballistic missile defense, such as the one
currently undergoing ﬂight tests as part of a thin US national missile defense
system, because boost-phase KKVs must home on accelerating targets. This
places greater demands on the homing guidance system, the amount of fuel
required for homing, and the required peak KKV acceleration. In addition,
the KKV initially must home on the rocket plume, then switch to home on
=== page 19 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 19
the missile body during the end game. For engagement geometries where the
KKV sensors view the missile body through the plume, this can be challenge.
However, multispectral sensors and illumination of the missile body with an
onboard LIDAR should meet this challenge.
Homing on the payload section of the target missile would be required if one
is concerned about live warheads landing on another country ’s territory. KKV
lethality against boosters should be high because accelerating missiles undergo
large axial loads that cannot be carried if the missile structure is weakened by
a projectile passing through the missile body and, perhaps, not even if the
KKV passes through the payload section of the missile. Consequently, KKV
impact will lead to the rapid collapse of the missile structure, resulting in a
rapid reduction of the axial thrust, although some residual thrust may exist
in random directions. If the payload section is intact, it will continue to ﬂyo n
a ballistic trajectory, albeit at signi ﬁcantly reduced range. Various “lethality
enhancement”techniques have been suggested to increase the chance that the
payload and the booster will be destroyed in a single shot, but their effectiveness
is not assessed here. Sufﬁce it to say that boost-phase intercept still is effective,
although politically less attractive, if it destroys the booster even if the warhead
survives.
Boost-phase KKVs should be designed to be as light as possible because this
proportionally reduces the mass of the interceptor missile, for a given intercep-
tor speed. Airborne interceptors, in particular, should be as light as possible
due to limited aircraft payloads, especially for ﬁghters and unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). The upshot of this section is that boost-phase KKVs weighing
50–90 kg and having 2.0 km/sec divert capability are technically feasible using
current technology. Advances in lightweight propellant tanks, divert rocket mo-
tors and sensor suits may allow 25 kg KKVs with 2.0 km/sec of divert capability
to be built, although this would be challenging within the next decade. Claims
that boost-phase KKVs can be built with a mass as low as 10 kg are quite
optimistic, although such lightweight KKVs do not violate the laws of physics.
Exoatmospheric and endoatmospheric KKV designs are quite different be-
cause the aerodynamic drag and lift forces on KKVs operating below 40 km in-
tercept altitude substantially affect their performance. Endoatmospheric KKVs
require a shroud to reduce aerodynamic drag and a window to protect the in-
frared sensors from overheating. At ABI speeds above 4 km/sec, low altitude
(25–30 km) intercepts become dif ﬁcult due to aerodynamic window heating —
heating levels reach 1,000 MW/m2 at this speed and altitude, thereby requiring
special window designs or active window cooling.20 For this reason, Scud B in-
tercepts, which occur at these altitudes, are challenging, in addition to their
short boost time. However, endoatmospheric KKVs have an advantage in that
=== page 20 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
20 Wilkening
Table 3: Boost-phase kinetic kill vehicle designs.
Baseline Advanced Baseline Advanced
Property exo-KKV exo-KKV endo-KKV endo-KKV
Mass breakdown
Seeker mass (kg) 7.0 4.9 3.6 2.5
Avionics mass (kg) 9.5 6.7 9.3 6.5
Engine mass (kg) 11.4 5.8 10.3 5.5
Tank mass (kg) 10.9 3.8 4.5 1.8
Structural mass (kg) 3.5 2.5 9.5 5.6
Propellant mass (kg) 44.2 24.7 16.5 9.8
Total KKV mass (kg) 86.5 48.3 53.5 31.7
Other properties
Total divert (km/sec) 2.0 2.0 1.0 1.0
Final KKV accel. (g) 15 15 15 15
Divert thrust (kN) 6.2 3.5 5.5 3.2
Divert isp (sec) 285 285 280 280
Propellant fraction 0.51 0.51 0.31 0.31
they can maneuver with aerodynamic lift forces, thus requiring less fuel for
divert maneuvers. Exoatmospheric KKVs, on the other hand, do not have to
contend with atmospheric drag. But, in general, they have higher closing veloc-
ities with their targets and larger fuel loads because they maneuver entirely
by divert propulsion.
To arrive at a plausible estimate for the mass of a boost-phase KKV, this
analysis estimates the mass of different subsystems based on analogies with
other systems. Table 3 illustrates the mass breakdown for the key subsystems:
seeker, avionics, divert engines, propellant tanks, structural mass, and pro-
pellant. The exoatmospheric KKVs in this table have been designed to have
a total divert capability of 2.0 km/sec and a ﬁnal acceleration of 15 g in the
homing end game. The seeker and avionics masses are based on analogy with
the Clementine experiment, which used a KKV-like sensor to map the surface
of the moon.21 The structural mass for exoatmospheric KKVs is assumed to be
3.5 kg, although lighter designs may be devised through clever use of the tanks
for structural support.
The divert rocket engine mass is based upon the mass of four Rocketdyne
LEAP KKV divert engines scaled to different thrust levels by the trust-to-
mass scaling ratio for satellite divert engines (a similar class of divert engines).
Figure 5 shows the least-squares ﬁt to satellite divert and attitude control en-
gines along with three data points for the weight-to-thrust ratio of existing
KKV divert engines.22 Note that the satellite divert engines are heavier than
the KKV divert engines because they are designed to survive in space for many
years, undergo repeatedﬁrings, and potentially burn for a total of several hours
=== page 21 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 21
Figure 5: KKV divert engine scaling.
whereas KKV divert engines can be hermetically sealed until they are used once
and they only burn for a total of a few minutes. Using the scaling relationship
for satellite divert and attitude control engines and ﬁtting it to four times the
weight-to-thrust ratio of the heaviest Rocketdyne LEAP KKV engine with a
thrust of 1668N (i.e., a cruciform arrangement of KKV engines), one obtains
the following scaling relationship for the total KKV engine mass:
We = 0.0136T + 27,
where We is the weight of all four rocket engines (including the attitude control
thrusters which are a small part of the total mass) in Newtons andT is the di-
vert thrust of one engine in Newtons. This scaling relationship is appropriate for
pressure fed, bipropellant divert engines, which in this analysis is assumed to
burn mono-methyl hydrazine and N2O4. This equation provides a conservative
estimate for the KKV engine mass. Fitting the curve to the Kaiser-Marquardt
LEAP engine (with a thrust of 165N) would provide a more optimistic esti-
mate (the constant term would be 4N instead of 27N), andﬁtting to the lighter
485N Rocketdyne LEAP engine would provide an even more optimistic scaling
relationship.
=== page 22 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
22 Wilkening
Figure 6: Propellant tank scaling relationship.
Propellant tank mass is calculated by scaling the tank dry mass to volume
ratio for currently available composite propellant tanks, assuming the tanks
operate at 2,500 psi, and that they are out ﬁtted with a diaphragm to reduce
propellant sloshing and to control the center of mass of the KKV as propellant is
consumed. Diaphragms add approximately 40 percent to the tank dry mass.23
High pressures are assumed because this increases the thrust for pressure fed
liquid-propellant engines. Figure 6 illustrates a least-square ﬁt (dashed line)
to the mass-to-volume ratio for existing composite pressure tanks without di-
aphragms (the circles) rated at 2500 psi operating pressure. 24,25 Adding the
mass of diaphragms, determined from existing lower pressure titanium pro-
pellant tanks commonly used on satellites, to the mass of composite pressure
tanks, one arrives at an estimate for the mass of composite propellant tanks as
shown in Figure 6 (solid line).26 For comparison, an existing Ardeinc propellant
tank with a piston, as opposed to a lighter diaphragm, is also shown in the
ﬁgure.27 The resulting scaling relationship for 2500 psi composite propellant
tanks with diaphragms is
Mt = Vt (0.245 − 0.0454 log10 Vt ),
where Mt is the tank dry mass in kilograms andVt is the tank volume in liters.
The propellant mass and, hence, volume are derived from the total KKV divert
requirement discussed next.
=== page 23 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 23
An advanced technology version of an exoatmospheric boost-phase KKV is
also shown in Table 3. It represents the mass that probably can be achieved
within the next decade due to technical advances. This variant assumes a
30 percent weight reduction for the avionics and seeker masses due to advances
in lightweight batteries, guidance computers, focal plane arrays, and optics. In
addition, lightweight pump-fed engines are assumed with a corresponding drop
in tank mass due to their lower operating pressure.28 The weight of pump-fed
bipropellant engines is assumed to be
We = 0.0136T + 10,
where We is the weight of four divert engines, including attitude control engines,
in Newtons and T is the divert thrust of one engine in Newtons. The propellant
tank dry mass is given by
Mt = Vt (0.128 − 0.0357 log10 Vt ),
where Mt is the tank dry mass in kilograms and Vt is the tank volume in
liters for Titanium tanks (Aluminum would be lighter) rated at 250 psi op-
erating pressure including diaphragms. The structural mass also has been re-
duced by 30 percent for the advanced KKV design. Other researchers have
proposed lighter kill vehicles; in particular, Lawrence Livermore National Lab-
oratory has designed a lighter advanced technology kill vehicle with better
performance— a total divert capability of 2.5 km/sec — with a total mass esti-
mated at 30 kg.29
The baseline endoatmospheric KKV used in this analysis is assumed to
have a total divert capability of 1.0 km/sec because it uses aerodynamic lift for
much of its maneuvering. Consequently, it requires less propellant. The ﬁnal
end game KKV acceleration still is assumed to be 15 g. The avionics mass is
assumed to be nearly the same as the exoatmospheric KKV (the battery is
a bit lighter), and the sensor suite is lighter due to the lack of a long-wave
infrared sensor (which is ineffective for low-altitude intercepts due to window
heating) and its associated cryogenic unit. However, the structural mass is
considerably heavier due to the need for a shroud to reduce drag and to protect
the KKV within the atmosphere. The shroud mass is assumed to scale as the
square-root of the total KKV mass because this approximates how the strength
of structural support elements vary with the force they must withstand. The
structural masses for the endoatmospheric KKVs given in Table 3 are consistent
with those of other, more detailed, studies.30 The engine speciﬁc impulse (Isp) is
a bit lower than for exoatmospheric KKVs to reﬂect endoatmospheric operation,
=== page 24 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
24 Wilkening
with no thrust enhancement assumed due to the interaction between the rocket
exhaust and the air stream ﬂowing past the KKV. This enhancement can be
as large as 30 percent. 31 The advanced endoatmospheric KKV is assumed to
have 30 percent lower avionics and seeker masses, pump-fed divert thrusters,
a lighter tank mass, and a reduced structural mass.
The KKV divert capability required to home on a target can be determined
from the appropriate guidance law for homing guidance systems. The propellant
mass required to achieve this divert can be calculated from the rocket equation.
The divert required to compensate for a given miss distance can be calculated
using proportional navigation guidance laws and the divert required to home on
a target undergoing constant acceleration can be calculated using augmented
proportional navigation laws.32 However, neither proportional, nor augmented
proportional, navigation is optimal for boost-phase intercept because booster
acceleration is not constant.
More importantly, ballistic missiles can maneuver during their boost phase,
thus introducing errors in the predicted intercept point that are quite large —
on the order of several hundred kilometers between the predicted intercept
point at the time of ABI launch and at the time of intercept for ICBM tar-
gets. As noted before, boost-phase maneuvers can occur whenever missiles are
launched against targets whose range is less than the missile’s maximum range.
The excess propellant can be used to loft or depress the missile ’s trajectory,
to carry out plane changes, or, in the case of some solid-propellant missiles,
to implement general energy management maneuvers to reduce the missile ’s
range.
Acceleration matching has been suggested as a better guidance law for
boost-phase intercept in the recent APS Study and researchers at Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory have suggested a guidance law that optimizes
both the time to go before intercept (i.e., the axial acceleration of the KKV) and
the lateral divert requirement (i.e., the perpendicular acceleration) for boost-
phase engagements.33 The results of the APS analysis suggest that exoatmo-
spheric KKVs will require 2.0 –2.5 km/sec total divert capability to home on
maneuvering ICBMs, including the effects of sensor noise, guidance time de-
lays and different closing speeds between the KKV and its target.34
Figure 7 shows the results of a simple calculation that con ﬁrms the APS
result. Here the total divert is calculated assuming the KKV matches the per-
pendicular component of the target’s actual acceleration relative to what would
be expected if the target did not maneuver during the boost phase. The engage-
ment geometry is assumed to be one that maximizes the normal component
of acceleration as viewed by the KKV (i.e., a worst-case). The divert require-
ments in Figure 7 represent averages between cases where the perpendicular
=== page 25 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 25
Figure 7: Divert requirements for different boost-phase intercepts.
component of the target acceleration arises from lofting or depressing the tra-
jectory, where either the second or third stage (the stage is given in parenthe-
ses) is used to loft or depress the trajectory. The divert required to compensate
for sensor noise (approximately 150 m/sec), end game homing (approximately
120 m/sec), and initial heading errors (at most 200 m/sec) are also included in
the graphs shown in Figure 7.35
Figure 7 indicates that the required divert varies for different ICBMs
launched against different cities in the United States. Note that missiles aimed
at Anchorage, Alaska (the darker bars), from North Korea have more excess
propellant than missiles aimed at Seattle (the lighter bars) and, hence, require
greater KKV divert capability to intercept.36 Similarly, if one assumes emerging
states can build missiles as large as the Chinese DF-5 ICBM, or that the defense
should be designed to be effective against large Russian or Chinese ICBMs, and
that such missiles carry only one light warhead, thereby freeing up consider-
able fuel for maneuvers, then KKVs will require signi ﬁcantly greater divert
capability (3.0–3.5 km/sec) for successful intercept. Finally, Iranian ICBMs re-
quire less divert to intercept than North Korean ICBMs, for identical missiles,
=== page 26 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
26 Wilkening
because they have less excess fuel for maneuvering (i.e., Iran is farther from
U.S. territory and Iranian ICBM trajectories bene ﬁt less from the earth ’s
rotation).
Therefore, one potential countermeasure to boost-phase intercept is to
launch large liquid-propellant ICBMs toward targets at short range with small
payloads, thereby maximizing the maneuver capability of the ICBM booster.
The obvious counter-countermeasure is to build larger KKVs with more divert
capability. However, these KKVs may be too heavy, depending on progress to-
ward lightweight KKV designs, for airborne interceptors, thereby effectively
ruling out an ABI option. Another possible countermeasure would be to launch
ballistic missiles only on trajectories that require high KKV divert to intercept,
thereby maximizing the chance that the KKV will run out of fuel. This is pos-
sible if the attacker knows the interceptor launch location, which would be the
case for ﬁxed ground-based launchers but not for airborne or naval launch plat-
forms. Clearly, KKVs must either be designed with sufﬁcient divert capability
or their launch location must be unknown to the offense to render this tactic
impotent.
Figure 8 illustrates the total KKV mass as a function of the total divert
required for intercept. Exoatmospheric KKVs are illustrated in the left-hand
graph and endoatmospheric KKVs in the right-hand graph. Clearly, the divert
requirement has a strong impact on total KKV mass because not only is more
propellant required, but the propellant tanks are larger, the divert engine thrust
and, hence, mass is larger to achieve the same 15 g endgame acceleration, and
the structural mass increases, all of which adds to the KKV dry mass.
In summary, exoatmospheric KKVs with a mass of approximately 90 kg and
a total divert velocity of 2.0 km/sec should be technically feasible and should
have the capability to intercept most emerging ICBM and intermediate-range
ballistic missile (IRBM) threats. Similarly, endoatmospheric KKVs with a total
divert velocity of 1.0 km/sec can probably be built with a mass of approxi-
mately 55 kg. Clearly, there is a premium on making the dry mass of the KKV
as light as possible. More advanced KKV designs should be technically feasible
within the next decade that can reduce this mass by 40 –50 percent. Finally,
to illustrate a more optimistic assessment, the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory design goal for its exoatmospheric Advanced Technology Kill Ve-
hicle for boost-phase intercept is shown in the left-hand graph in Figure 8 — a
design goal supported by considerable design experience even if a KKV with
these characteristics has yet to be ﬂight tested. Note that among the technical
challenges will be the design of small, high-thrust divert engines because the
required thrusts in Figure 8 are higher than that which has been achieved to
date (see Figure 5).
=== page 27 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 27
Figure 8: Exo- and endo-KKV mass versus divert requirement.
AIRBORNE INTERCEPTORS
The ABI concept is based on a high-speed air-launched rocket with a KKV
as its payload. ABI concepts originally were proposed in the early 1990s for
theater missile defense, withﬁghter aircraft for launch platforms. Bombers and
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have also been proposed, depending on ABI
size and mass. In the early 1990s, the Raptor/Talon UAV-based ABI concept was
designed for theater and national missile defense, with the emphasis shifting
toward the larger Global Hawk UAV by the mid-1990s. The larger payload
(1,000 kg), higher operating ceiling (60,000 ft) and longer endurance (24 hours)
=== page 28 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
28 Wilkening
of the Global Hawk made it an attractive launch platform for lightweight ABIs.
Finally, a joint US –Israeli UAV-based ABI concept was pursued for theater
missile defense in the mid-1990s, using the small Moab interceptor carried
aboard an Israeli UAV. However, this program was cancelled in 1999. There is
no active ABI program at the current time.
To achieve reasonable intercept ranges, ABIs should have ﬂyout speeds of
approximately 4–6 km/sec. These speeds require two-stage missiles. At speeds
below 3 km/sec single-stage missiles are appropriate. The largest missiles that
can be carried conveniently on rotary launchers or external pylons on exist-
ing U.S. heavy bombers would weigh approximately 1,500 kg. 37 For deploy-
ment on ﬁghter aircraft, ABI masses should be less than about 1,000 kg. UAV
deployment would require ABIs with masses of a few hundred kilograms each.
Clearly, the lighter the ABI, the more that can be carried aboard any given
launch platform.
Table 4 illustrates several optimally-staged ABI designs used in this
analysis, with different ABI and KKV combinations. Any missile design in-
volves complex tradeoffs between missile propulsion, structural design, and
aerodynamic performance. Moreover, airborne missiles must be designed for
Table 4: Airborne interceptor designs.
Baseline Advanced Baseline Advanced
Property exo-KKV exo-KKV endo-KKV endo-KKV
Total ABI mass (kg) 1,500 1,500 1,000 1,000
Ideal velocity (km/sec) 5.4 6.1 5.4 6.0
ABI length (m) 5.5 5.6 4.4 4.4
Maximum acceleration (g) 56 67 56 66
Total burn time (sec) 20 20 20 20
Payload
KKV mass (kg) 86.5 48.3 53.5 31.7
Shroud mass (kg) 8.1 9.2 8.1 9.0
Second Stage
Stage mass (kg) 232 197 154 134
Propellant mass fraction 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81
Isp (sec) 280 280 280 280
Stage /Delta1V (km/sec) 2.35 2.7 2.4 2.7
Thrust (kN) 52 44 34 30
Stage burn time (sec) 10 10 10 10
First Stage
Stage mass (kg) 1173 1245 785 825
Propellant mass fraction 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85
Isp (sec) 280 280 280 280
Stage /Delta1V (km/sec) 3.0 3.4 3.0 3.3
Thrust (kN) 274 291 183 193
Stage burn time (sec) 10 10 10 10
=== page 29 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 29
extreme environments, in particular, thermal cycling, low temperature oper-
ation, and possibly high accelerations due to aircraft maneuvering. On the
other hand, airborne missiles can be designed to accelerate faster than mis-
siles launched from the surface of the earth due to the reduced drag force at
high altitudes.38 The ABIs listed in Table 4 have been modeled after existing
air-to-air missile and ABI designs.39 The ABIs with exoatmospheric KKVs have
been designed to ﬁt on heavy bombers, while the ABIs with endoatmospheric
KKVs have been designed for deployment on ﬁghter aircraft. The ABI shroud
mass is calculated by scaling from a known missile shroud mass according to
the square root of the maximum dynamic pressure the ABI experiences during
ﬂyout. The ABI propellant mass fractions are lower than one ﬁnds for typical
ballistic missiles because more structural mass is required to handle the high
axial accelerations during the interceptor’s boost phase and the added mass of
external ﬁns for aerodynamic maneuver. The rocket motor speciﬁc impulse (Isp)
is representative of modern solid-propellant rocket motors and the burn time
has been selected to be short (20 seconds) to improve the intercept range for
short ﬂight times, although this increases the atmospheric drag at low altitudes.
The actual ﬂyout speeds for these missiles are approximately 0.5 –1.0 km/sec
less than the ideal velocity due to atmospheric drag and gravity, depending on
the exact ﬂight trajectory.
Lighter ABIs than the ones given in Table 4 can be designed with the same
speed if the KKV mass is reduced, as illustrated in the left-hand graph in
Figure 9 for a 5.4 km/sec ideal velocity. For example, a KKV would have to
weigh approximately 30 kg for a 5.4 km/sec ABI to weigh 500 kg, that is, a
mass that allows several to be carried on a high-altitude UAV and about 8 to
12 to be carried on a single ﬁghter aircraft. Similarly, if the KKV mass is held
constant, smaller ABIs give rise to lower ideal velocities, as illustrated in the
right-hand graph in Figure 9 for 87 kg and 48 kg KKVs. For example, these
KKVs would have 3.5 km/sec and 4.5 km/sec ideal ﬂyout speeds, respectively,
if the ABI mass is reduced to 500 kg. The 250 kg ABI masses in the right-hand
graph in Figure 9 represent single-stage missiles.
ABI INTERCEPT RANGES
The maximum ABI intercept range depends on the ABI speed and time; the
latter of which depends on the target boost time, the time delay between bal-
listic missile and ABI launch, and the time before booster burnout required
to ensure that the target debris falls well short of its intended target even for
missiles whose burn times vary by 5 percent from their nominal burn times.
=== page 30 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
30 Wilkening
Figure 9: Capability of lighter ABIs.
A two-stage ABI based on current rocket-motor technology should be able to
achieve speeds of approximately 4.5–5.0 km/sec (ideal velocities between 5.0 –
6.0 km/sec) with an 87 kg KKV as its payload, as discussed above. Boost times
for theater-range ballistic missiles are typically between 60 and 150 seconds, de-
pending on their range and design, whereas solid-propellant ICBM burn times
are approximately 180 seconds, and liquid-propellant ICBM burn times are ap-
proximately 240–300 seconds, as shown in Table A1. The time delay between
ballistic missile and ABI launch varies between approximately 20 seconds and
75 seconds depending on the sensor architecture and the target missile, as
shown in Table 1.
=== page 31 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 31
Figure 10: ABI hypersonic vehicle proﬁle.
The intercept ranges for the ABIs in Table 4 are estimated by simulating
ABI ﬂight using the COMET code, modi ﬁed to include atmospheric lift. This
code takes into account the forces produced by the rocket propulsion system,
gravity, inertial forces due to the earth’s rotation, and the aerodynamic forces
of lift and drag as the interceptor ﬂies through the atmosphere. 40 Figure 10
illustrates a representative shape for the hypersonic ABIs listed in Table 4 (8
degree nose wit ha2c m rounded tip). The life and drag coef ﬁcients for the
vehicle shown in Figure 10 are illustrated in Figure 11, as a function of ABI
speed and angle of attack. These coef ﬁcients were calculated using the Aero-
Prediction Code AP02.41 The lift and drag coefﬁcients for the ABI second stage
and the KKV are not shown, though they differ somewhat from those shown in
Figure 10.
Figure 12 illustrates aﬂight fan for an exoatmospheric KKV launched from
a 1,500 kg ABI, assuming the ABI follows a gravity turn after burnout. Such
plots can be used to determine the approximate ABI intercept range by locating
the ABI isotime contour that passes through the proper intercept altitude for a
given target missile. However, in this analysis the ABI intercept range is deter-
mined using an optimal ABIﬂight proﬁle where the ABI initially climbs higher
in the atmosphere to minimize drag, then turns over toﬂy more horizontally to
the intercept point. These optimal trajectories can increase the ABI intercept
range by as much as 10 percent compared to those derived using Figure 12,
though often the improvement is less than a few percent.
Table 5 gives the calculated intercept ranges using optimal ABI trajecto-
ries against a range of different North Korean and Iranian ballistic missile-
trajectory combinations for the time delays associated with the space-based in-
frared sensors and airborne X-band radar given in Table 1. The ICBMs launched
from North Korea are assumed to originate from the northwest corner of the
country and those launched from Iran are assumed to come from the center
of the country (near Yadz), thus providing worst-case intercept geometries for
both countries (see Figures 2 and 4). All ballistic missile trajectories are lofted
because this produces the shortest ABI intercept range, except for Scud B and
=== page 32 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
32 Wilkening
Figure 11: ABI lift and drag coefﬁcients.
Scud C missiles, which are assumed to ﬂy minimum energy trajectories. No
Scud B or Scud C launches occur from Iran because these missiles do not have
the range to threaten territory of interest to the United States. The Shahab 3,
which is assumed to be identical to the No Dong, is the shortest-range Iranian
missile examined in this study. The Shahab 4 is assumed to be identical to the
Taepo Dong 1 and the Shahab 5 is a bit larger than the Taepo Dong 2 (see Table
A1) to give it a range to strike most European capitals.
=== page 33 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 33
Figure 12: 1,500 kg ABI ﬂyout fan.
Against North Korea, an airborne radar located approximately 100 km
south of the DMZ usually detects the missile launches ﬁrst. This location ben-
eﬁts from higher Doppler signatures because North Korean ICBMs ﬂya w a y
from the radar and MRBMs launched toward South Koreaﬂy toward the radar.
Airborne radars over the Caspian Sea or the Persian Gulf are the ﬁrst to de-
tect Iranian ICBM launches originating from central Iran. Iranian MRBMs
launched from western Iran are ﬁrst detected by whichever airborne X-band
radar happens to be closest to the launch site. The average ground speed for
North Korean ABI intercepts is approximately 4.2 km/sec and 4.8 km/sec for
the baseline and advanced KKV designs, respectively, regardless of whether
the intercepts are endoatmospheric or exoatmospheric, and the average ground
speed for Iranian ABI intercepts is approximately 4.1 km/sec and 4.7 km/sec
for the baseline and advanced KKV designs, respectively. Using these values,
the reader can derive approximate intercept ranges for different ﬂight times.
Finally, launching ABIs from 60,000 ft instead of 40,000 ft reduces the atmo-
spheric drag, thereby increasing the ABI range by approximately 10 percent
compared to the values given in Table 5.
Several trends are apparent in Table 5. First, intercept ranges supported
by space-based infrared detection and tracking sensors are about the same for
=== page 34 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
34 Wilkening
Table 5: ABI intercept ranges against North Korean and Iranian ballistic missiles.
Intercept range (km)
1.0 km SBIRS Airborne X-band radar
ABI-target combinations North Korea Iran North Korea Iran
1500 kg ABI— 87 kg Exo KKV
290-sec ICBM-Boston 820 785 890 790
290-sec ICBM-Seattle 775 800 845 805
290-sec ICBM-Anchorage 745 775 820 780
240-sec ICBM-Boston 700 660 760 650
240-sec ICBM-Seattle 645 675 710 670
240-sec ICBM-Anchorage 605 640 670 630
180-sec ICBM-Boston 490 470 525 445
180-sec ICBM-Seattle 455 485 495 460
180-sec ICBM-Anchorage 425 460 470 435
Taepo Dong 1/Shahab 4 375 370 485 460
Taepo Dong 2/Shahab 5 490 495 580 510
1500 kg ABI— 48 kg Advanced Exo KKV
290-sec ICBM-Boston 935 905 1015 910
290-sec ICBM-Seattle 900 920 980 925
290-sec ICBM-Anchorage 880 900 960 905
240-sec ICBM-Boston 800 765 865 755
240-sec ICBM-Seattle 775 780 825 770
240-sec ICBM-Anchorage 730 750 795 740
180-sec ICBM-Boston 565 550 605 525
180-sec ICBM-Seattle 540 560 585 535
180-sec ICBM-Anchorage 515 545 565 515
Taepo Dong 1/Shahab 4 425 420 545 520
Taepo Dong 2/Shahab 5 560 575 660 590
1000 kg ABI— 54 kg Endo KKV
Scud B 0 — 105 —
Scud C 70 — 175 —
No Dong/Shahab 3 110 130 215 215
1000 kg ABI— 32 kg Advanced Endo KKV
Scud B 0 — 110 —
Scud C 80 — 185 —
No Dong/Shahab 3 125 145 235 235
North Korea and Iran, as one would expect. Second, the airborne X-band radar
adds appreciably to ABI intercept ranges over North Korea since it can detect
missiles soon after launch because the launch sites are within line of site of the
radar, even when the radar is orbiting in protected airspace over South Korea or
the Sea of Japan; whereas an airborne radar covering Iran would require access
to neighboring airspace in Turkey, Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, and the Persian
Gulf and, even then, has longer detection times because the target missile
must climb above the radar horizon at a range of approximately 600 km for
ICBMs launched from the center of Iran. In fact, a space-based infrared sensor
with a 1 km pixel footprint yields longer ABI intercept ranges against Iranian
=== page 35 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 35
ICBMs than an airborne X-band radar. Therefore, space-based infrared sensors
provide the best detection and tracking option for large countries like Iran with
limited access to neighboring airspace. However, if airborne X-band radar can
get close enough, longer intercept ranges can be obtained. Airborne radar has
its greatest impact on boost-phase theater missile defense, as illustrated in
Figure 13. Here, Scud B intercepts become feasible if the ABI platform ﬂies
over North Korean airspace and No Dong intercepts are possible from outside
North Korean airspace.
Third, North Korean ICBM intercepts have approximately 10 percent
shorter range against west coast trajectories compared to east coast trajectories
because west coast trajectories have more excess fuel and, hence, higher lofted
trajectories, thereby decreasing the ABI intercept range due to the fact that
the ABI must climb higher in altitude (up to 400 km instead of 200 –250 km)
to intercept the missile. There is less variation in the ABI intercept range for
different east and west coast Iranian ICBM trajectories because these targets
are closer to the maximum range of the Iranian ICBM used in this analysis.
Finally, intercepts against Iranian ICBMs heading for Seattle and Anchorage
occur at longer ranges than the same missile-target pairing from North Korea
because Iranian lofted trajectories burn out at lower altitudes and, hence, give
rise to longer ABI intercept ranges, all other things being equal.
Figure 13: ABI intercept ranges for North Korean MRBMs.
=== page 36 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
36 Wilkening
ABI coverage is better illustrated using maps showing the worst-case ABI
intercept ranges relative to the ground traces for different ballistic missile tar-
gets. For example, Figure 14 illustrates the intercept range against North Ko-
rean Scud B and Scud C missiles for a 1,000 kg ABI carrying the baseline
endoatmospheric KKV and receiving launch detection and tracking informa-
tion from an airborne X-band radar. The circles in the ﬁgure illustrate the
ABI intercept range for an ABI platform located at the center of each circle.
That is, any Scud B or Scud C missile that burns out within the respective
circles is vulnerable to intercept by an ABI launched from the center of each
circle.42 The strings of dots in the ﬁgure represent the ground traces, shown
every 10 seconds, for Scud B and Scud C boost phases. From Figure 14 one can
surmise that it would take about three ABI orbits over or near North Korean
airspace to cover all possible Scud B launches and about the same number to
cover all possible Scud C launches (because they can originate from a larger
Figure 14: ABI intercepts against Scud B and Scud C missiles.
=== page 37 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 37
area due to their longer range). Fewer ABI launch locations would be required if
potential ballistic missile launch locations can be identi ﬁed using intelligence
information. Note that an airborne X-band radar is essential to obtain such
favorable coverage. Without the rapid target detection and tracking provided
by such a radar, Scud B coverage disappears and Scud C coverage is reduced
markedly (see Figure 13).
Figure 15 illustrates the hypothetical intercept range for 1,000 kg ABIs
against No Dong missiles and 1,500 kg ABIs against Taepo Dong 1 missiles
launched toward Japan, assuming space-based infrared detection and tracking
w i t ha1k m pixel footprint. The longer ground traces are the Taepo Dong 1
boost phases. The thin outer circles in Figure 15 represent the No Dong inter-
cept range using an airborne X-band radar. Consequently, No Dong launches
can be intercepted using only two, or perhaps three, ABI launch locations out-
side North Korean airspace, but only if an airborne X-band radar is part of
the sensor architecture. A single ABI site is all that is required to defend
Japan and Okinawa from intermediate-range Taepo Dong 1 missiles, even with
Figure 15: ABI intercepts against no Dong and Taepo Dong 1 missiles.
=== page 38 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
38 Wilkening
space-based infrared detection and tracking. Moreover, the latter ABI site could
be far away from North Korean airspace over international waters in the Sea of
Japan. Clearly, Taepo Dong 2 launches could also be intercepted from a single
ABI launch location outside North Korean airspace.
Figures 16 and 17 illustrate similar plots for the intercept range associ-
ated with a 1,500 kg baseline exoatmospheric ABI launched from a location
over the Sea of Japan approximately 100 –150 km off the North Korean coast
against hypothetical North Korean ICBMs with boost times of 240 and 180 sec-
onds, respectively, assuming that space-based infrared sensors with 1 km pixel
footprints detect and track the target. The ground traces for ICBMs launched
towards the US east coast, west coast, and Hawaii (the lone eastward trajec-
tory) are shown in theﬁgures for two North Korean launch locations, providing
an indication of the spread in azimuth for ICBM launches. The intercept ranges
Figure 16: ABI intercepts against 240-sec liquid-propellant North Korean ICBMs.
=== page 39 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 39
Figure 17: ABI intercepts against 180-sec solid-propellant North Korean ICBMs.
in Table 5 correspond to ICBM launches from the northwestern location. Obvi-
ously, North Korean ICBMs launched from the east coast of North Korea would
be easier to intercept.
The two outer thin circles in Figure 17 correspond to improved ABI
performance— the middle ring corresponds to an advanced exoatmospheric
KKV using space-based infrared detection and tracking with 1 km pixel foot-
prints and the outer ring corresponds to an advanced exoatmospheric KKV
using airborne X-band radar for detection and tracking. Consequently, the
1,500 kg baseline exoatmospheric ABI using space-based infrared detection
and tracking with 1 km pixel footprints should be able to intercept 240-
second ICBMs, but not 180-second solid-propellant ICBMs. Clearly, ICBMs
with burn times longer than 240 seconds also can be intercepted (e.g., the 290-
second ICBM given in Table A1) because the added ABI ﬂight time more than
compensates for the longer range the ICBM can ﬂy during its boost-phase.
=== page 40 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
40 Wilkening
The use of an airborne X-band radar improves the ABI intercept range and,
when combined with a 48 kg advanced KKV, provides a capability to just
intercept solid-propellant ICBMs, thereby providing a possible defensive re-
sponse to this responsive offensive threat. Clearly solid-propellant ICBMs
with burn times shorter than 180 seconds would be dif ﬁcult to intercept un-
less the ABI has higher speed or ﬂies closer to, if not over, North Korean
airspace.
Figures 18 through 20 illustrate comparable ABI coverage against Iranian
MRBMs and ICBMs. The ABI launch locations are approximately 100–120 km
outside Iranian airspace. The range arcs for ABI intercepts are drawn assuming
a space-based infrared sensor with 1 km pixel footprints for target detection
and tracking. Higher resolution space-based infrared sensors would improve
these intercept ranges somewhat. Airborne radar could also help, but only for
missiles launched close to the periphery of Iran, that is, within approximately
400 km of the radar location.
Figure 18: ABI intercepts against Iranian Shahab-3, -4 and -5 MRBMs.
=== page 41 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 41
Figure 19: ABI intercepts against 240-sec liquid-propellant Iranian ICBMs.
The inner and outer circles in Figure 18 around the ABI launch locations
over Turkey, the Caspian Sea and the Persian Gulf correspond to intercept
ranges against Shahab 4 and Shahab 5 intermediate-range ballistic missiles,
respectively, for a 1,500 kg ABI carrying a baseline exoatmospheric KKV and
using space-based infrared sensors with 1 km pixel footprints. Consequently,
the Shahab 5 can be intercepted from ABI launch locations outside Iranian
airspace. However, the Shahab 4 could be difﬁcult to intercept depending on its
launch location. Shorter-range missiles like the Shahab 3 would be very difﬁcult
to intercept, even with a lightweight advanced endoatmospheric KKV design
and an airborne X-band radar, as shown by the thin outer ring around the ABI
launch location along the Iraq-Iran border in Figure 18, unless the ABI platform
ﬂies over Iranian territory. The inner circle at this location corresponds to the
ABI intercept range with a 1,000 kg ABI carrying the baseline endoatmospheric
KKV and using space-based infrared sensors with 1 km pixel footprints.
The ABI intercept ranges in Figures 19 and 20 are drawn for ICBMs
launched from central Iran, which represents a worst-case detection geometry
=== page 42 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
42 Wilkening
Figure 20: ABI intercepts against 180-sec solid-propellant Iranian ICBMs.
although not necessarily the longest-range intercept geometry. In this case, a
1,500 kg ABI with the baseline exoatmospheric KKV using space-based infrared
sensors with 1 km pixel footprints should be able to intercept 240-second (and
290-second) liquid-propellant ICBMs from launch locations outside Iranian
airspace, as one can see from Figure 19. However, three or more launch lo-
cations would be required if Iran spread its hypothetical ICBM force across its
territory or if U.S. intelligence is unable to localize all possible ICBM launch
locations. ABI intercept of a 180-second solid-propellant ICBM is not possible
unless more rapid target detection and tracking is available, even with the
48 kg advanced exoatmospheric KKV (the thin outer circles in Figure 20). ABI
launch platforms would have to move closer to Iranian airspace, or possibly
ﬂy over Iranian airspace, to have high conﬁdence that solid-propellant ICBMs
could be intercepted.
In summary, typical intercept ranges for medium-range, intermediate-
range, solid-propellant ICBMs, and liquid-propellant ICBMs are between 0 –
200 km, 400–650 km, 430–600 km, and 600–1,000 km, respectively. For large
=== page 43 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 43
states such as Iran, space-based infrared detection and tracking is the best
sensor option. However, for small states such as North Korea airborne X-band
radar can add signi ﬁcantly to the ABI ﬂight time, thus enabling intercepts
that would otherwise be infeasible without ﬂying over North Korean airspace.
Finally, the baseline KKV designs illustrated in Table 3 provide satisfactory
intercept capability under most circumstances, but stressing threats such as
short burn time MRBMs (Scud B) and solid-propellant ICBMs require lighter
KKVs similar in mass to the advanced KKVs illustrated in Table 3.
ABI Force Size
The required size of the ABI arsenal is determined by the number of ABI mis-
siles that must be launched at each booster target to obtain a high intercept
probability, multiplied by the estimated number of missiles in the opponent ’s
arsenal. To this one must add the number of missiles that are airborne at any
given time in areas from which no missiles are launched, that is, absentee ABIs,
and the number of missiles needed for operational test and evaluation, and
spares. The approximate number of ABI launch platforms for an effective force
is determined by multiplying the number of ABIs that must be launched at each
target by the maximum number of ballistic missiles that can be launched from
a single ABI defended area in the time it takes to replace ABI launch platforms
that have exhausted their interceptors (i.e., several hours), multiplied by the
number of ABI defended areas required to cover all possible launch locations
in the country of concern, divided by the carrying capacity of each ABI launch
platform, and, ﬁnally, multiplied by the ratio of the number of ABI launch plat-
forms required to support one in the air 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Note
that concentrating mobile MRBM launchers for large salvo attacks makes them
more vulnerable to air attack and, hence, is not necessarily a preferred offensive
tactic. Moreover, if their movement is detected in time, ABI launch platforms
can be concentrated against them. ICBM launch sites are likely to be ﬁxed, at
least for ﬁrst generation ICBMs.
To illustrate this arithmetic, assume four ABIs must be launched at each
booster target to achieve a high probability of kill and that the maximum salvo
launch capability is 20 MRBMs or 10 ICBMs. In this case, approximately 40 –
80 ABI, possibly with a mixture of endoatmospheric and exoatmospheric KKVs,
would have to be airborne in each ABI defended area to ensure that no salvo
launch from any area could saturate the defense. Depending on the geography
and whether the missile threats are principally from medium, intermediate,
or intercontinental-range ballistic missiles, anywhere from one to three ABI
defended areas would be required to adequately cover the territory of interest.
=== page 44 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
44 Wilkening
Three defended footprints, for example, would require approximately 120–240
ABIs airborne at all times.
The number of ABI launch platforms required to support this presence is de-
termined by the carrying capacity of each platform and its airborne endurance.
If we assume that bombers or other large aircraft can carry twenty 1,500 kg
or 1,000 kg ABI, ﬁghter aircraft can carry four 1,000 kg ABI, and a large long-
endurance UAV like the Global Hawk can carry one 1,000 kg ABI, then up to
12 bomber-sized aircraft, 60 ﬁghter aircraft, or 240 UAVs airborne, or some
mix of these, would have to be airborne at all times in the three defended areas.
The airborne endurance for bomber-sized aircraft,ﬁghters and long-endurance
UAVs like the Global Hawk is approximately 12, 8, and 24 hours, respectively.
If one assumes one additional launch platform on the ground for a spare in
case of maintenance problems, then three bombers, four ﬁghters, or two UAVs
would be required to support one airborne 24 hours a day for extended peri-
ods of time. Therefore, the total inventory of launch platforms to keep 240 ABI
airborne at all times would be roughly 36 heavy bombers or similar large air-
craft, 240 ﬁghter aircraft, 480 UAVs, or some mix of these platforms. A mix
is preferable to take advantage of the different payload capacities, endurance,
and vulnerability of each platform. In any case, this is a large force! Clearly,
lightweight ABI are desirable to increase the carrying capacity of each launch
platform, thereby minimizing the cost for procuring and operating the launch
platform force.
The number of ABI missiles required for an opposing arsenal of 100 missiles
is 400 (assuming four ABI are launched at each target), plus 160 that are
airborne in two of the three ABI defended areas where missile launches might
not occur and perhaps 20 percent more for spares. Thus, the total ABI inventory
in this example would be about 700 ABI missiles for a threat of 100 ballistic
missiles and a geography that requires three zones to adequately cover all
possible launch locations. Clearly, one must tailor this arithmetic to different
circumstances.
Estimates for the overall acquisition cost for such a force are necessarily
rough because the cost for the different elements is not well known. Neverthe-
less, the overall acquisition cost will be driven by the launch platform cost and
the cost of the airborne radar, if it is part of the sensor architecture. The in-
dividual ABI missiles are relatively inexpensive (estimated here to cost about
$3 million each based on analogy with Air-Launched and Sea-Launched Cruise
Missiles, which cost about $2 million and $1 million each, respectively). There-
fore, an inventory of 700 ABI would cost approximately $2.0 billion. If we as-
sume new launch platforms are purchased, that is, they cannot be obtained
from another part of the Air Force or Navy, then heavy bombers of the B-1B
=== page 45 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 45
type, ﬁghters similar to the F-15E, and UAVs similar to the Global Hawk would
cost approximately $300 million, $20 –$30 million, and $16 –$20 million each,
respectively.43 The cost to ﬁll three orbits 24 hours a day for 20-missile salvo
launch threats is approximately $11 billion, $5–7 billion, and $8–10 billion for
the bomber,ﬁghter and UAV forces, respectively. If two airborne radar orbits are
maintained 24 hours a day, this would require an inventory of approximately
eight aircraft. Assuming these radar are similar in cost to the E-3 AWACS
(approximately $400 million each), this would add another $3.2 billion to the
acquisition cost.
Therefore, the total acquisition cost for an airborne boost-phase ballistic
missile defense system, not including space-based sensors, would be roughly
$10 to $16 billion for 700 ABI missiles and enough launch platforms to cover
three defended areas 24 hours a day with enough ABIs to handle salvo launch
threats of up to 20 missiles and enough airborne X-band radar to maintain two
radar orbits 24 hours a day near a country of concern. This does not include
operating costs or research and development costs. If bomber orﬁghter aircraft
could be drawn from other parts of the Air Force or Navy, this would reduce the
acquisition cost considerably. These numbers are very approximate. More re-
ﬁned estimates are needed if ABI systems are considered in future U.S. ballistic
missile defense plans.
BOOST-PHASE COUNTERMEASURES
Relatively few countermeasures exist against boost-phase ballistic missile de-
fenses. Clearly lightweight decoys and other penetration aids that challenge
midcourse ballistic missile defense systems do not interfere with boost-phase
defense. The two obvious countermeasures are missiles with short boost times
and missiles that can maneuver during their boost phase. Both of these counter-
measures have been taken into account in this analysis. Solid-propellant mis-
siles, for example, the 180-second ICBM examined in this analysis, stress boost-
phase intercepts. However, ABIs still have substantial capability if light-weight
advanced KKVs can be designed. If fast burn solid-propellant ICBMs are de-
ployed of the sort hypothesized during the US Strategic Defense Initiative in
the mid-1980s with boost times as short as 100 seconds, then boost-phase in-
tercept capability would be severely compromised unless ABI launch platforms
ﬂy over the opponent’s territory.
Ballistic missiles launched against targets at less than their maximum
range have excess fuel that can be used for boost-phase maneuvers. These are
not rapid maneuvers — which probably would be ineffective for avoiding the
=== page 46 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
46 Wilkening
more agile boost-phase KKV — but relatively slow maneuvers that move the
predicted intercept point as several hundred kilometers from the original pre-
dicted intercept point determined at the time the ABI booster burns out. This
error must be removed by the KKV. The kill vehicle used in this analysis has
the ability to change its velocity by 2.0 km/sec, an amount sufﬁcient to compen-
sate for most ﬁrst generation booster maneuvers. If greater booster maneuvers
are deemed feasible, more KKV divert capability will be required. Therefore,
this countermeasure can be managed in a straightforward manner.
Beyond these two countermeasures, one can imagineﬂares, sounding rock-
ets with similar acceleration proﬁles to larger ballistic missiles, salvo launches,
and boosters designed to fractionate during their last stage so the defense is
presented with multiple targets during the intercept end game. Most of these
countermeasures would not be effective. Flares can be distinguished by their
low emitted infrared power and their“color.”Sounding rockets can be designed
to accelerate like larger missiles; however, their infrared signature is smaller
than that from large rocket motors, especially during ﬁrst stage ﬂight. This
countermeasure might delay an ABI launch until the infrared signature could
be determined, thus eliminating the bene ﬁts of early launch detection asso-
ciated with airborne radar. However, it would not fundamentally defeat the
system. Salvo launches could saturate the detection and tracking architecture
or deplete the supply of available ABIs within range of the salvo launch. Again,
this is easily countered byﬁelding more sensors and interceptors, at some cost.
Since interceptors can be launched in rapid succession, even from the same
launch platform, it is difﬁcult to imagine that salvo launches of as many as 10
to 20 missiles could defeat a well designed ABI deployment. Finally, missiles
with fractionated last stages are probably beyond the capability of emerging
missile states and clearly would have to be tested before they are deployed.
Boost-phase proponents have suggested interceptors with fractionated KKVs
as a defensive counter-countermeasure, but such devices would be technically
challenging to build.44 Hence, this countermeasure and its defensive response
seem fanciful at the current time.
ABI OPERATIONAL AND POLITICAL CONSTRAINTS
Several operational limitations make the ABI concept less than ideal for missile
defense, although none are so constraining as to eliminate this boost-phase
defense option. First, for national missile defense against large, inland states
like Iran, access to neighboring airspace is required (e.g., in the case of Iran,
Turkish, Turkmenistan, and Afghanistan airspace, as well as the airspace over
the Caspian Sea and the Persian Gulf ). This presents problems if neighboring
=== page 47 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 47
states fail to cooperate. ABI systems could defend against North Korean ICBM
threats— the easy case for boost-phase missile defense— from international air
space over the Sea of Japan. Similarly, airborne X-band radar could be located
in international airspace in the case of North Korea but larger states like Iran
would require access to neighboring airspace. Space-based infrared sensors
clearly are preferable in this regard.
Second, access to the opponent ’s airspace may be required for short burn-
time ICBMs (i.e., burn times less than 180 seconds) and short-range MRBMs.
Stationing ABI launch platforms over an opponent ’s territory violates its
sovereignty and constitutes an act of war because these platforms are armed
aircraft. If ABI launch platforms are located outside the opponent ’s airspace,
with plans to penetrate their airspace soon after hostilities commence, then
short-burn missiles launched at the start of a war would get a free ride through
the defense, thus creating pressure on both sides to preempt. However, ABI
launch platforms can enter enemy airspace within minutes after a conﬂict be-
gins, thereby providing a useful defense in scenarios where, for example, ballis-
tic missiles aremed with weapons of mass destruction are held in reserve to be
launched only when the survival of the regime is threatened. Still, short-burn
missiles could exert considerable political leverage before a war starts if the
defense cannot defend against the ﬁrst few missiles launched.
Third, ABI platforms in and around an opponent ’s airspace may not sur-
vive enemy air defenses. This poses a dif ﬁcult challenge if ABI platforms are
required to loiter over hostile territory, although it may also be a problem if
the launch platform orbits over neighboring airspace. Standoff ranges of 100 –
150 km would keep the launch platform out of range of enemy surface-to-air mis-
siles; however, air defenses (F-15C/D and AWACS aircraft) would be required
to protect the ABI launch platforms from enemy ﬁghters that enter neighbor-
ing airspace. This increases the operational cost of deploying ABI systems.
Using high-altitude UAVs ﬂying above 60,000 feet reduces their vulnerability;
however, it does not make them immune to advanced ﬁghters with advanced
air-to-air missiles. Stealth technology would help reduce this vulnerability
signiﬁcantly, but this substantially increases launch platform cost. After a war
starts, the air defenses of small states can be suppressed, making ABI platform
survival less of an issue. Again, scenarios where an opponent actually launches,
as opposed to threatens to launch, ballistic missiles armed with nuclear, bio-
logical, or chemical weapons often occur late in a war. In these scenarios, am-
ple time should exist to establish air superiority over the opponent ’s territory.
Conventionally-armed ballistic missiles, on the other hand, may be launched
early in a conﬂict, as was the case in the 1991 Gulf War with Iraq, with their
concomitant political costs.
=== page 48 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
48 Wilkening
Fourth, keeping aircraft airborne for months on end would be costly,
although it can be, and has been, done for periods extending from several
months to over a year. This is not a trivial air operation. However, it is no
more complex than the air operations the United States routinely plans for
theater air defense. Therefore, ABI systems could be available for weeks, if not
months, on end, 24-hours a day, 7 days a week. However, such a defense could
not be maintained for years on end due to the operational costs. Consequently,
airborne boost-phase ballistic missile defense is a crisis or wartime defense
and would not be effective against accidental or unauthorized missile launches
unless they occurred in the midst of a crisis or war.
Fifth, the short reaction time required to make any boost-phase defense, in-
cluding airborne boost-phase defense, effective implies that there is little time
for high-level decisions regarding the release of boost-phase interceptors. At
ﬁrst glance, this appears to be a serious concern. However, one should bear in
mind that ABI release authority is very different from nuclear weapon release
authority. No explosive weapons are involved. Boost-phase interceptorsﬁred at
ﬁctitious targets would burn up in the atmosphere, posing little threat to hu-
mans on the ground. Moreover, boost-phase defense is very different from other
situations where military and civilian operations intermingle. False warning
of a missile launch is not likely. There are very few civilian rocket launches
that mimic a ballistic missile launch; unlike air defenses, for example, where
identifying friend from foe and combatant from noncombatant aircraft is a seri-
ous issue, or ground attack where distinguishing hostile from friendly vehicles
contributes to tragic friendly- ﬁre incidents and collateral damage to noncom-
batants in every war. Space-launch vehicles might be confused with missile
launches, but they are almost always launched from designated launch sites
with days of advance notice in peacetime. In the event they are not, as was
the case with the August 31, 1998 North Korean satellite launch attempt,
such rockets may be shot down in a crisis or war. Therefore, predelegating
intercept launch authority to ﬁeld commanders, which is required to make
any boost-phase defense effective, entails acceptable risks, unlike the case of
predelegating launch authority to ﬁeld commanders for nuclear weapon use.
Finally, forward deployment of ABI systems could appear to an opponent
to be escalatory. This dilemma arises with the forward deployment of almost
any military system. There is no particular reason why deploying boost-phase
missile defenses would be more destabilizing than deploying other air, naval, or
ground forces forward in a crisis. Any military action of this sort entails the risk
of escalation, as well as the potential to de-escalate a crisis. The usual sense
in which ballistic missile defense is thought to be destabilizing occurs when
a preemptive attack can degrade the opponent ’s ballistic missile force to the
=== page 49 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 49
point where the defense can handle the “ragged” retaliatory strike. Emerging
missile states certainly would worry about preemptive attacks against their bal-
listic missiles by U.S. conventional, and perhaps nuclear, forces. The presence
of boost-phase defenses may signal the impending attack. However, regional
opponents have little to gain by launching nuclear, biological, or chemical bal-
listic missiles out of fear of loosing this capability when boost-phase defenses
are forward deployed because to do so would be an act of suicide at a point early
in an evolving crisis when the leadership may still hope to avoid war.
DOES AIRBORNE BOOST-PHASE MISSILE DEFENSE THREATEN RUSSIA
OR CHINA?
If ABI systems are effective against theater- and intercontinental-range bal-
listic missiles launched from emerging ballistic missile states, they might also
be effective against Russian and Chinese ICBMs and SLBMs, thus provoking
political, if not military, responses from these two major nuclear powers. In
fact, ABI systems do not pose a realistic threat to either Russian or Chinese
strategic ballistic missiles.
Figure 21 illustrates the ABI coverage of potential Russian ICBM and
SLBM, and Chinese ICBM launch locations. The ground-traces for ICBM and
SLBM boosters launched from representative locations toward targets on the
U.S. east and west coasts also are illustrated. The ABI intercept ranges are
based on ABI launch delays using a space-based infrared detection and tracking
sensor with 1 km pixel footprints (airborne radar cannot operate close enough
to all possible Russian or Chinese launch locations). The intercept range for
a 1,500 kg ABI armed with a 48 kg advanced exoatmospheric KKV against
Russian SS-25 solid-propellant ICBMs (which are being replaced by the shorter
burn time SS-27) is estimated to be at most 600 km (see Table 5); the intercept
range against Russian liquid-fuel SLBMs such as the SS-N-23 (with a boost
time of 250 seconds) is estimated at less than approximately 830 km (the fu-
ture Russian SS-NX-28 SLBM may contain solid propellant and, hence, have
a shorter burn time); and the ABI intercept range against the Chinese DF-5
liquid-fuel ICBM is estimated to be at most 800 km (although the future Chi-
nese DF-31 solid-propellant ICBM has a shorter boost time). These intercept
ranges are illustrated in Figure 21 for ABI launch locations close to potential
Russian and Chinese launch locations.
As one can see, it takes about ﬁve ABI orbits to cover Russia ’s ballistic-
missile submarine bastions near its territory. If, in the future, Russia’s SLBM
force is located entirely with the Northern Fleet, this ﬁgure drops to around
=== page 50 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
50 Wilkening
Figure 21: ABI capability against Russian and Chinese strategic missiles.
two or three ABI orbits. Despite a preference for basing submarines in bastions,
Russian missile-carrying submarines can deploy into the open ocean, with per-
haps some greater risk from U.S. antisubmarine warfare. In this case, approx-
imately 20 ABI orbits would be required to cover all possible SLBM launch
locations in the North Atlantic, and 30 would be required for all possible
launch locations in the North Paci ﬁc— unless the United States can localize
Russian submarines by tracking them in the open ocean. 45 If Russia deploys
single-warhead ICBMs in former SS-18 and SS-19 silos, and mobile SS-27
ICBMs at up to 10 garrisons used in the past for mobile SS-25 ICBMs, at least
seven additional ABI orbits would be needed to cover all possible ICBM launch
locations. The smaller shaded circles (with a radius of 150 km) in Figure 21
represent the approximate area into which mobile ICBMs could deploy within
10 hours after leaving their garrison. Larger deployment areas may be possible,
but logistical constraints eventually limit their size. Clearly, as mobile ICBM
deployment areas grow in size, more ABI orbits would be required.
=== page 51 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 51
Therefore, the United States would have to keep ABI launch platforms
aloft continuously in at least 10 areas to cover likely Russian ICBM and SLBM
launch locations, and potentially three to four times this number if Russia sends
its missile-carrying submarines into the open ocean. This would be a daunting
task! Aircraft and UAVs may not have enough fuel to reach these locations
from distant allied air ﬁelds. More importantly, ABI launch platforms, sensor
aircraft, and airborne tanker support would be vulnerable to Russian air de-
fenses. While it is plausible to think of suppressing the air defenses of a weak
state, suppressing Russia ’s strategic air defense system is an entirely differ-
ent matter, even with the current degraded state of Russia ’s air defenses. In
addition, the airﬁelds from which ABI operations originate would be vulnera-
ble to Russian attack because they are few in number and relatively easy to
identify. Emerging ballistic-missile states would have dif ﬁculty carrying out
such attacks. Finally, Russian salvo launches could be quite large and would
make any residual airborne boost-phase system quite ineffective. Hence, an
ABI boost-phase ballistic missile defense system would pose very little threat
to Russia’s ICBMs and SLBMs for operational reasons and not because an ABI
could not intercept a Russian strategic missile if it is within range.
Airborne boost-phase systems may pose more of a threat to Chinese strate-
gic missiles because China has fewer ICBM launch sites, the boost time for the
Chinese DF-5 ICBM is relatively long, and China has few, if any, operational
SLBMs that can threaten the United States (not to mention their vulnerability
to U.S. anti-submarine warfare). However, ABI platforms still would have to
penetrate deep into Chinese airspace to cover all possible ICBM launch loca-
tions, thereby exposing themselves to increasingly sophisticated Chinese air
defenses. The distances from ABI bases to reasonable orbit points are large,
making the airborne operation difﬁcult to sustain. Chinese attacks against ABI
airﬁelds also are a possibility. Finally, China is in the process of modernizing its
strategic arsenal with solid-propellant mobile DF-31 ICBMs. Thus, the number
of ABI sites required to cover all possible Chinese ICBM launch sites will grow
substantially in the next decade. Therefore, the threat posed by an ABI system
to China’s strategic missiles is not very great. However, ABI systems might
pose a threat to Chinese theater-range missiles aimed at Taiwan from across
the Taiwan Strait — although China could still threaten Taiwan with longer-
range missiles launched from deeper inside the mainland. Consequently, while
ABI systems pose little threat to China ’s future strategic arsenal, the deploy-
ment of ABI systems could complicate Sino-U.S. relations.
Finally, it is interesting to note that a Russian ABI system would not
threaten U.S., French, British or Chinese strategic forces, for the same rea-
sons cited above. Therefore, the British and French concern during the Cold
=== page 52 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
52 Wilkening
War— that U.S. missile defenses would spur the deployment of Russian de-
fenses which undermine their strategic deterrent— is without substance in the
case of ABI boost-phase defenses because France and Great Britain rely on
SLBMs for their strategic deterrent and Russia simply cannot mount or sus-
tain the airborne operation required to put these assets at risk. This creates
the interesting possibility that the United States, Russia, and interested NATO
countries could collaborate on the development, and possible deployment, of
ABI defenses without giving rise to suspicions about each other ’s strategic
intent.
COMPARISON WITH THE APS BOOST-PHASE MISSILE DEFENSE STUDY
This analysis is largely consistent with the recently published American Phys-
ical Society report on boost-phase ballistic missile defense. Both studies agree
that timely detection and tracking is critical to boost-phase missile defense and
that space-based infrared sensors will play a key role. This study highlights
the importance of airborne X-band radar for rapid launch detection and track-
ing, especially for favorable geographies like North Korea. The APS Study did
not consider airborne X-band radar. Both studies agree that boost-phase KKVs
with total divert velocities of at least 2.0 km/sec are required for effective boost-
phase intercept against ICBMs and that masses in the range of 50 –100 kg
for such KKVs should be technically feasible in the next decade. They also
agree that boost-phase intercept from terrestrial launch platforms, airborne
platforms in particular, is technically feasible against relatively slow burning
liquid-propellant ICBMs.
However, the conclusions differ with respect to solid-propellant ICBMs. The
APS study ﬁnds that:
Boost-phase defense of the entire United States against solid-propellant
ICBMs, which have shorter burn times than liquid-propellant ICBMs, is un-
likely to be practical when all the factors are considered, no matter where or
how interceptors are based. Even with optimistic assumptions, a terrestrial-based
system would require very large interceptors with extremely high speeds and
accelerations to defeat a solid-propellant ICBM launched from even a small coun-
try such as North Korea.46
Contrary to this conclusion, the current study ﬁnds that solid-propellant
ICBMs are not beyond the reach of airborne interceptors. Clearly, short burn
missiles create stressful timelines for boost-phase defense. Solid-propellant
ICBMs, in particular, are dif ﬁcult targets. However, there is no “knee in the
curve” beyond which airborne boost-phase intercept is no longer feasible. To
=== page 53 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 53
some extent this different conclusion can be traced to different input assump-
tions in the two analyses.
On the physics, both studies agree. However, the APS study uses more
conservative input assumptions. For example, the APS Study bases the burn
time for solid-propellant ICBMs on U.S. solid-propellant SLBMs, which have
slightly shorter (170-second) nominal burn times compared to the U.S. and
Russia solid-propellant ICBMs used in this study with 180-second nominal
burn times. The APS study also assumes that it takes approximately 45 sec-
onds to detect and track solid-propellant ICBMs after launch. This study has
determined that solid-propellant ICBMs can be detected and tracked within
29 seconds after launch in the case of North Korea using an airborne X-band
radar and within 37 seconds after launch using space-based infrared sensors
with a 1 km pixel footprint. The shorter detection and tracking time associated
with space-based infrared sensors comes about because this study assumes that
initial target heading errors can be removed during the interceptor’s 20-second
boost phase prior to KKV release, thus allowing the ABI to be launched a few
seconds earlier. Airborne missiles can also accelerate faster and, hence, have
higher average ﬂight speeds relative to surface-based interceptors (upon which
the APS study focused) because the drag force is lower at high altitudes. The net
result is that the ABIs examined in this study have approximately 25 seconds
more ﬂight time against solid-propellant ICBMs launched from North Korea
than comparable intercepts in the APS study.47 This translates into intercept
ranges that are approximately 100 km greater than the APS intercept ranges.
One should also keep in mind that this study invoked higher-speed ABIs using
light-weight advanced KKVs before concluding that 180-second solid-propellant
ICBMs could be intercepted.
Even with the more optimistic assumptions used in this study, solid-
propellant ICBMs and short-range MRBMs are very difﬁcult targets and their
successful intercept will require sensor architectures that are designed to push
the detection and tracking time as low as possible and interceptors with the
highest possible speed (determined here to be around 6.0 km/sec ideal ve-
locity) through the use of light-weight KKVs and large (1,500 kg) airborne
missiles. While 50 kg KKVs stretch what is currently possible, solid-propellant
ICBMs stretch what is currently possible in terms of offensive threats. Neither
may be far fetched 10 years from now.
Finally, it is important to note that airborne interceptors have the dis-
tinct advantage that they can always be moved closer to the suspected launch
site if the ABI intercept range is marginal, albeit with the requirement to
gain access to neighboring airspace or to ﬂy near, if not over, the opponent ’s
airspace, with increased concern for launch platform survival. If the threat is
=== page 54 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
54 Wilkening
serious enough, these risks may be acceptable. For example, in the case of North
Korea, solid-propellant ICBMs could be intercepted if the ABI launch platform
orbited over Chinese airspace and, perhaps, if orbited over Russian airspace
north of Vladivostok. Ground-based interceptors do not have this option and
naval interceptors are limited to navigable waters. Moreover, in some scenar-
ios an opponent ’s air defenses may be seriously degraded by the time ICBM
launches actually occur. If airborne platform survival is of paramount con-
cern, one can employ low-observable launch platforms, at increased cost. Still,
the issue is not one of ABI technical capability against short burn time boost-
ers but rather whether the defense is worth the cost. Even if one assumes
airborne platforms are stationed far enough outside enemy airspace to be
reasonably safe from air defense threats, ABIs still can intercept most solid-
propellant ICBM trajectories using 1,500 kg ABIs and 50 kg KKVs with ac-
tual ﬂight speeds of approximately 5.5 km/sec (6.0 km/sec ideal velocities).
Such interceptors are not very large and, while their speed is high, reason-
able missile designs based on current technology should be able to achieve this
performance.
Finally, one should note that the most important considerations that affect
individual preferences for boost-phase ballistic missile defense often are not
technical, but rather have to do with operational concerns, different threat as-
sessments, and cost. These concerns are largely outside the scope of this study.
Therefore, one should not be surprised if different analysts, even technical ana-
lysts, come to different conclusions regarding the wisdom of pursuing one type
of missile defense over another.
CONCLUSION
Boost-phase interceptors light enough to be launched from aircraft appear to
be technically feasible for both theater and national missile defense. Within the
next decade, endoatmospheric KKVs with the capability to home on maneuver-
ing boosters (i.e., with 1.0 km/sec of divert) probably can be built with a mass
between 30–55 kg and exoatmospheric KKVs with 2.0 km/sec of divert proba-
bly can be built with a mass between 50 –90 kg. Early ballistic missile launch
detection and tracking is crucial for an effective boost-phase defense. Space-
based infrared sensors and airborne X-band radar both appear to offer timely
detection, resulting in ABI intercept ranges against IRBMs, solid-propellant
ICBMs, and liquid-propellant ICBMs between 400 –650 km, 430–600 km, and
600–1,000 km, respectively. An effective boost-phase defense against MRBMs
requires airborne X-band radar for early launch detection and tracking. In this
case, ABI intercept ranges on the order of 100–230 km may be achieved against
=== page 55 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 55
MRBMs with boost times below 100 seconds. In general, airborne interceptors
are the only form of terrestrial boost-phase defense that can be effective against
very short burn time ICBMs and MRBMs because, if necessary, they canﬂy over
an opponent’s territory.
In addition, while ABI systems offer the prospect of an effective defense
against emerging ballistic-missile threats, including threats such as chemical
or biological submunitions, they pose very little threat to the strategic nuclear
forces of the ﬁve major nuclear powers. Thus, ABI systems will appear threat-
ening to emerging missile states, yet not destabilizing to the major nuclear
powers— states with which the United States has many interests in common.
To the extent one takes the rhetoric of sharing U.S. ballistic missile defense
technology with other countries seriously, ABI systems may be the most trans-
ferable type of ballistic missile defense because they cannot be used directly
against the United States. The technology upon which ABI systems are based
may be sensitive, but operational ABI systems cannot threaten U.S. strategic
forces. For all of these reasons, the United States should pay more attention to
this boost-phase defense option than currently is the case.
The principal drawbacks associated with ABI systems are that they
offer no protection against accidental or unauthorized Russian or Chinese
missile launches, or for that matter accidental or unauthorized launches from
emerging missiles states unless they occurred in the midst of a crisis or war
when ABI systems would be on station. Moreover, they are expensive to operate
and they are inherently less robust to those offensive countermeasures that
increase the weight of the KKV— for example, large ICBMs with lots of excess
maneuver capability that require heavy KKVs with divert velocities above
3.0 km/sec and, hence, heavy interceptor missiles — because of the maximum
weight limits for air-launched missiles. Again, ABI launch platforms can move
closer to potential missile launch sites to compensate for the slower speeds
associated with heavier KKVs if necessary. However, none of these limitations
is so severe as to eliminate the ABI option from consideration as a viable
component of a future U.S. missile defense architecture. In fact, compared to
the limitations inherent in all boost-phase missile defense concepts, airborne
intercept remains one of the most attractive options.
This analysis has concerned itself principally with the technical feasibil-
ity and operational effectiveness of airborne boost-phase intercept. The larger
questions of the priority that any form of ballistic missile defense should re-
ceive relative to other important U.S. security concerns (e.g., countering ter-
rorism, U.S. conventional force modernization, etc.) and the cost-effectiveness
of ABI compared to other forms of ballistic missile defense are not addressed
here.
=== page 56 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
56 Wilkening
NOTES AND REFERENCES
1. A prototype airborne laser carried aboard a 747 aircraft is currently under develop-
ment, with deployment expected some time between 2007 and 2010. For a technical anal-
ysis of its capabilities see the report of the American Physical Society (APS) Study Group
entitled Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense: Scientiﬁc and Tech-
nical Issues, July 2003⟨http://www.aps.org/public affairs/popa/reports/nmd03.html⟩; (29
March 2004); and Geoffry Forden, “Airborne Laser: Shooting Down What ’s Going Up,”
Center for International Security And Cooperation, Stanford University, September
1997. Space-based lasers have been under consideration for many years, however, they
will not be technically feasible until 2015–2020, at the earliest.
2. See, APS Study, Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense , July
2003, Section 10.3.
3. Airborne infrared sensors operating in the short or medium-wave infrared band
have an angular resolution on the order of 10 −5 radians for 30 cm optics and, hence,
will have track resolutions on the order of six meters from ranges of 600 km. Such track
accuracies would allow rapid target azimuth determination and might facilitate booster
typing.
4. Space-based LIDAR systems, and airborne LIDAR systems if they canﬂy at altitudes
above 60,000 feet and get within 600 km of their targets, may play an interesting role in
boost-phase missile tracking. However, such sensors were not examined in this study.
5. For a detailed treatment of these issues see Frederick S. Simmons, Rocket Exhaust
Plume Phenomenology, The Aerospace Corporation Press, El Segundo, CA, 2000.
6. An NEI of 10 −14 W/cm2 represents a conservative noise ﬁgure in the 2.7 µm band
for a 30 cm aperture telescope.
7. APS Study, Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense, July 2003,
Section 10.1.
8. Ibid. Sections 10.1.2 and 10.1.3.
9. If one assumes subpixel resolution for the space-based infrared sensor, which should
be possible if the image spot is comparable to the pixel dimension on the focal plane
array, then the approximate target heading can be determined more rapidly than has
been assumed here. After initial detection, the sensor can collect tens of frames of data
on the moving target by staring at the detected spot in less than one second.
10. Heading errors, for the purpose of this analysis, are determined in a simple-minded
manner by taking half of the pixel footprint dimension ( ±0.5 km for a 1 km × 1k m
footprint) and dividing it by the downrange distance the target missileﬂies. More accu-
rate calculations would take the lateral position, velocity, and acceleration uncertainties
produced by the tracking ﬁlter as a function of time after initial detection to determine
when the ABI could be launched.
11. This /Delta1V requirement is calculated based on the lateral distance error produced by
a heading error, which is determined by the downrange distance the missile ﬂies as a
function of time and the sensor resolution. Assuming proportional navigation during
this portion of the ABI ﬂight and normal intercept trajectories, the divert requirement
is given by where
/Delta1V = θ · R · vt
vi
· N
(N − 1)t ,
=== page 57 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 57
where θ(t) is the heading error as a function of time (i.e., the resolution of the sensor
divided by the downrange distance the missile travels as a function of time after ini-
tial detection), R is the nominal intercept range (approximately 600–800 km for ICBM
targets), vt is the average target speed (approximately half the ballistic missile burnout
speed), vi is the interceptor speed (approximately 5 km/sec for ABIs), N is the navigation
ratio for proportional navigation (assumed here to be 4), and t is the time to intercept
which depends on the boost-phase duration of the target ballistic missile.
12. The tracking time depends on the exact range of the trajectory compared to the
missile’s maximum range because this determines how much propellant is available for
lofting the missile. Table 1 is based on conservative lofted trajectories. However, worse
trajectories could be constructed if a long-range missile such as the Taepo Dong 2 is used
to attack a target at very short range. In this case, the initial missile trajectory could
be nearly vertical and the tracking delays would be longer than those given in Table 1.
Of course, the reentry vehicle would have to be designed to handle the higher reentry
speeds associated with these lofted trajectories.
13. Designing ABI boosters with a sustainer motor that continues to provide thrust
after the main booster burns out would help reduce the KKV divert requirement at the
expense of interceptor speed. A system tradeoff study would be required to determine
whether this is bene ﬁcial. This analysis assumes that the KKV must carry suf ﬁcient
fuel to correct for maneuvering targets on its own.
14. For an analysis of theater-range ballistic missile targets that predicts several kilo-
meter predicted intercept point errors, see R.C. Lacoe, D.C. Johannsen, K.L. Zondervan,
and Col. T. Fitzgerald, “Sensor Fusion Applications In The Airborne Interceptor (ABI)
Program,”presented at the 8th National Symposium on Sensor Fusion, 1995.
15. See Merrill I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems, 3rd ed., New York: McGraw
Hill, 2001, pp. 89–90.
16. See Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense, op. cit., Section
10.2.2.
17. The time required to pass through the elevation beam width depends on the radar
elevation beam width, the missile’s vertical speed, and the range from the radar to the
target. Faster missiles (e.g., solid-propellant ICBMs and some MRBMs) have greater
vertical velocities and reach an altitude where they appear above the radar horizon
earlier than liquid-propellant ICBMs. MRBMs can have high elevation rates because
frequently they are detected at shorter ranges (e.g., 250 –400 km) than ICBMs (i.e.,
400–700 km). The notional 180-second solid-propellant, 240-second liquid-propellant,
and 290-second liquid-propellant ICBMs examined in this analysis have elevation rates
of approximately 1.0 mrad/sec, 0.75 mrad/sec, and 0.60 mrad/sec, respectively, for an
airborne radar at a detection range of 400 km. Scud B, Scud C, and No Dong MRBMs
launched from North Korea have elevation rates when viewed by an ABR south of the
DMZ between approximately 0.5 to 1.0 mrad/sec for detection ranges varying from 230
to 330 km.
18. See David K. Barton, Modern Radar System Analysis, Artech House, 1988, pp. 523–
530.
19. Airborne X-band radar actually can detect solid-propellant ICBMs at ranges less
than the horizon (i.e., less than 400 km) within as little as 12–15 seconds after launch,
much faster than space-based infrared detection, because the radar has line of site to
the target and it takes only a short time for the target to exceed the radar ’s Doppler
=== page 58 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
58 Wilkening
notch. This favorable geometry occurs for North Korean launches but would not oc-
cur for larger countries where the airborne radar cannot get as close to the missile
launch site. However, even with such early launch detection, accurate tracking can-
not begin until the target missile has climbed about half a beam width above the
horizon. As is turns out, this longer track delay, when added to the shorter detec-
tion delay for solid propellant ICBMs yields the same total launch delay given in
Table 1.
20. See David R. Vaughan, Jeffrey A. Isaacson, and Joel S. Kvitky, Airborne Intercept:
Boost and Ascent-Phase Options And Issues , RAND Corporation, MR-772-AF, 1996,
pp. 16–17.
21. Clementine sensor suite data can be found at ⟨http://www.cmf.nrl.navy.mil/
clementine/sci.clem.html⟩ (29 March 2004) and ⟨http://www-phys.llnl.gov/clementine/
sensors/sensors.html⟩(29 March 2004).
22. K. Bryant, C. Knight, and R. Hurtz, “Planetary Lander Vehicles Utilizing LEAP
Technology,”AIAA 94-2748, 30th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference,
June 27–29, 1994.
23. Tank ullage is assumed to be 15 percent and propellant expulsion ef ﬁciency is as-
sume to be 97 percent.
24. The data for composite pressure tanks came from Structural Composite Industries
⟨http://www.scicomposites.com/⟩(29 March 2004).
25. Note that a simple theoretical argument based on hoop stress for cylindrical tanks at
constant pressure would predict that the mass-to-volume ratio would remain constant
as a function of tank volume. This is not quite accurate because small tanks cannot be
designed with arbitrarily thin walls and, hence, they tend to have higher mass-to-volume
ratios, as illustrated in Figure 6.
26. The data for titanium pressure and propellant tanks is from Pressure Systems In-
corporated ⟨http://www.psi-pci.com/Data Sheets1 main.htm⟩(29 March 2004).
27. This tank is scaled up from the 2000 psi S12962 propellant tank found on
⟨http://www.ardeinc.com/liquid.html⟩(29 March 2004).
28. For developments and applications of small pump-fed divert rocket engines see:
John C. Whitehead, Bipropellant Propulsion with Reciprocating Pumps, Lawrence Liv-
ermore National Laboratory, UCRL-JC-114530, June 16, 1993; John C. Whitehead,
Mars Ascent Propulsion Options for Small Sample Return Vehicles , Lawrence Liver-
more National Laboratory, UCRL-JC-127445, May 12, 1997; and J.C. Whitehead, Hy-
drogen Peroxide Gas Generator Cycle with a Reciprocating Pump, paper AIAA 2002-3702
presented at the 38th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference, July 7–10,
2002.
29. L.C. Ng, E. Breitfeller, and A.G. Ledebuhr, An Optimal t- /Delta1V Guidance Law for
Intercepting a Boosting Target , Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, UCRL-JC-
148995, June 30, 2002, p. 3.
30. See Steve Brown, et al.,Interceptor Concepts for the U.S. UAV Program, presented at
the 5th Annual AIAA/BMDO Technology Readiness Conference, Eglin AFB, September
16–20, 1996.
31. See S. H. Chen, Control Forces Produced By Lateral Jet Injection, Aerospace Corpo-
ration, Aerospace Technical Memorandum No. 92(2031-01)-1, January 1992.
=== page 59 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 59
32. See, for example, Paul Zarchan, Tactical and Strategic Missile Guidance , Volume
176, Progress In Astronautics and Aeronautics, American Institute of Astronautics and
Aeronautics, 1997, pp. 291–316.
33. See Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense , op. cit., Sections
12.2.4; and L.C. Ng, E. Breitfeller, and A.G. Ledebuhr,An Optimal t-/Delta1V Guidance Law
for Intercepting a Boosting Target , Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, UCRL-
JC-148995, June 30, 2002.
34. See Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense, op. cit., Section 12.3.
35. Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense, op. cit., Sections 12.3.2
and 12.4.
36. No clear advantage occurs for second versus third stage maneuvering in Figure 7
because lower KKV acceleration is required over a longer time to correct for second stage
maneuvers compared to higher acceleration over shorter periods for diverts that come
later in the booster’s ﬂight.
37. The SRAM-A, Air-Launched Cruise Missile, and Advanced Cruise Missile have
masses of 1,012 kg, 1,458 kg, and 1,250 kg, respectively. See Duncan Lennox, Jane’s
Strategic Weapon Systems, Issue 32, Jane’s Information Group, UK, 2000. Fighter air-
craft carry about two to ﬁve 2,000 lb bombs. See Jane’s All The World’s Aircraft, Jane’s
Information Group, UK, 1993, pp. 408, 410.
38. These ABI designs have axial accelerations of approximately 50 g. The highest accel-
eration ground-based interceptor ever developed by the United States was the nuclear-
tipped Sprint missile defense interceptor with a nominal axial acceleration of about 100 g
⟨see http://www.designation-systems.net/dusrm/app4/sprint.html ⟩ (29 March 2004).
This missile required ablative coatings to handle the atmospheric heating. The ABIs
shown in Table 4 have much lower atmospheric heating because they are launched at
high altitudes and, hence, require only a simple shroud to protect the KKV during
ﬂight.
39. See Kevin Bell, David Johannsen, and Kevin Zondervan (Aerospace Corporation),
Major Samuel Walker (Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center), Paul Fry, Robert
Hintz and Patrick Yates (Naval Air Warfare Center, China Lake), “An Airborne Inter-
ceptor for Boost Phase and Early Midcourse Theater Missile Defense,”paper presented
at the 1994 BMDO Intercept Technology Conference, 1994.
40. See Douglas Moody, COMET: Calculation of Missile Earth Trajectories , 2nd Ed.,
RAND Corporation, R-3240-1-DARPA/BMDO/RC, February 1997.
41. This is the 2002 release of a semitheoretical, semiempirical aerodynamic prediction
code designed by Dr. Frank G. Moore, API Incorporated, King George, VA.
42. The intercept zone is a circle because ABIs lose relatively little range even if they
execute a 180-degree turn shortly after launch to head toward their intercept point. Note
that the zone on the ground from which missile launches can be intercepted is a more
complicated shape and depends on the spread in azimuth for the missile launches from
a particular launch site.
43. For the B1B bomber cost see ⟨http://www.af.mil/news/factsheets/B 1B Lancer.html⟩
(29 March 2004); for the F-15, F-16, and F-18 ﬁghter costs see ⟨http://www.af.mil/news/
factsheets/ F 15 Eagle.html⟩(29 March 2004), ⟨http://www.af.mil/news/factsheets/F 16
Fighting Falcon.html⟩ (29 March 2004), and ⟨http://www.chinfo.navy.mil/navpalib/
factﬁle/aircraft/air-fa18html⟩ (29 March 2004); and for the Global Hawk UAV
=== page 60 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
60 Wilkening
cost see ⟨http://www.fas.org/irp/program/collect/docs/man-ipc-global hawk-010322.htm⟩
(June 2003).
44. One example of a fractionated kill vehicle design is given in A.G. Ledebuhr, et al.,
Genius Sand: A Miniature Kill Vehicle Technology to Support Boost-phase Intercepts and
Midcourse Engagements, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, UCRL-JC-148992,
June 30, 2002.
45. Anti-submarine warfare sensors may localize submarines to some extent. However,
the United States would still face the daunting challenge of maintaining airborne plat-
forms above possible SLBM launch locations far from ABI support bases for long periods
of time.
46. Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense, op. cit., p. xxv–xxvi.
47. The present study also made several assumptions that reduce the ABI intercept
range relative to the APS results, namely, assuming lofted ICBM trajectories and re-
quiring that the intercept occur far enough in advance of the nominal boost time to
account for 5 percent ﬂuctuations in the missile’s burn time.
48. Lofting or depressing the trajectory is assumed to occur with the missile ’s second
stage. Minimum energy trajectories use premature thrust termination so the payload
has sufﬁcient speed just to reach the target.
49. When a booster is intercepted its thrust should drop to zero quickly due to the
booster’s collapse. The resulting forces will scatter missile debris in a roughly elliptical
zone as opposed to a single point on the Earth’s surface. The size of this elliptical impact
zone will depend on the velocity imparted to the various fragments during the impact.
Some of this debris will burn up upon reentry into the earth’s atmosphere. However, the
remainder may scatter over a wide area with large pieces, including possibly the intact
payload, landing close to the ranges indicated in Figures A7 and A8.
APPENDIX A
BALLISTIC MISSILE CHARACTERISTICS
This Appendix describes the ballistic missile characteristics that are impor-
tant for analyzing boost-phase ballistic missile defense effectiveness. Table A1
lists the characteristics of a variety of notional medium, intermediate, and
intercontinental-range ballistic missiles that could pose a threat to U.S. forces
overseas or the U.S. homeland. These estimates are based on open sources for
missiles that actually exist (i.e., Scud B, Scud C, No Dong, and Taepo Dong 1 mis-
siles). The Taepo Dong 2, Shahab 5, and the three ICBMs are notional designs
that span a range of possible future intermediate- and intercontinental-range
ballistic missile threats. The 2-stage liquid-propellant ICBM is designed to have
a burn time of approximately 300 seconds— comparable to that of ﬁrst genera-
tion U.S. and Soviet liquid-propellant ICBMs. With a launch weight of 110,000
kg, this missile has a nominal range of 11,500 km with a payload of 400 kg.
=== page 61 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Table A1: Ballistic missile characteristics.
No Taepo Taepo 290-sec 240-sec 180-sec
Scud B Scud C Dong Dong 1 Dong 2 Shahab 5 ICBM ICBM ICBM
Nominal range (km) 300 610 1,340 1,920 3,680 4,750 10,700 10,700 14,500
Payload (kg) 985 700 1,000 1,000 1,000 500 400 300 800
Launch mass (kg) 5,900 7,200 20,000 25,400 69,000 70,500 110,000 69,000 45,800
Boost time (sec) 61 85 95 165 193 199 290 240 180
Max burnout speed 1.6 2.3 3.4 3.7 5.0 5.4 7.1 7.1 7.5
(km/sec)
1st Stage
Stage mass (kg) 4,915 6,500 19,000 19,000 50,000 52,000 95,000 50,000 29,000
Prop. fraction 0.72 0.77 0.85 0.85 0.82 0.83 0.87 0.82 0.89
CS area (m2) 0.61 0.61 1.13 1.13 4.52 4.52 3.14 4.52 2.0
Nozzle area (m2) 0.15 0.15 0.28 0.28 1.13 1.13 1.54 1.13 1.3
Vac. thrust (kN) 145 153 429 429 1,315 1,315 1,655 1,315 1,225
Vac. isp (sec) 257 267 257 257 263 263 293 263 291
Burn time (sec) 61 85 95 95 80 85 143 80 60
2nd Stage
Stage mass (kg) — — — 5,400 18,000 18,000 15,000 18,000 12,000
Prop. fraction — — — 0.74 0.83 0.84 0.83 0.83 0.87
CS area (m2) — — — 0.61 1.39 1.39 1.77 1.39 1.77
Nozzle area (m2) — — — 0.15 0.35 0.35 0.44 0.35 0.87
Vac. thrust (kN) — — — 145 350 350 240 350 495
Vac. isp (sec) — — — 257 270 270 290 270 290
Burn time (sec) — — — 70 113 114 147 113 60
3rd Stage
Stage mass (kg) — — — — — — — 700 4,000
Prop. fraction — — — — — — — 0.80 0.84
CS area (m2) — — — — — — — 0.61 1.54
Nozzle area (m2) — — — — — — — 0.15 0.75
Vac thrust (kN) — — — — — — — 30 160
Vac. isp (sec) — — — — — — — 250 290
Burn time (sec) — — — — — — — 47 60
61
=== page 62 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
62 Wilkening
Smaller missiles could achieve the same range with smaller payloads. However,
modern liquid-propellant ICBMs (e.g., the Chinese DF-5) have boost times on
the order of 230–250 seconds. To represent a missile of this class, Table A1 in-
cludes a 240-second ICBM, based in this case on the Taepo Dong 2 IRBM with a
solid-propellant third stage to give it a range of approximately 11,500 km with
a 300 kg payload— the assumed minimum payload for a small ﬁrst generation
nuclear (ﬁssion) weapon. Finally, the 180-second solid-propellant ICBM is mod-
eled after the Russia SS-25 ICBM. The payload has been reduced from that of
the SS-25 to give the missile sufﬁcient range to strike the entire United States
from launch locations in North Korea or Iran. This solid-propellant ICBM is in-
cluded to reﬂect the impact of an obvious countermeasure to boost-phase missile
defense, namely, shortening the boost time with faster burning solid-propellant
rocket motors. How soon emerging missile states might acquire solid-propellant
ICBMs is not clear, though it depends no doubt on the extent to which foreign
assistance is forthcoming from more advanced missile states. For the purpose
of this study, it has been assumed that emerging missile states cannot develop
“fast-burn” solid-propellant ICBMs within the next decade or two with boost
times on the order of 100 –130 seconds, which were hypothesized as a Soviet
responsive threat to U.S. space-based ballistic missile defenses in the mid-1980.
Figure A1 shows a range-altitude plot for the Scud B, Scud C, and No Dong
boost phases. The Scud B burns out in 61 seconds at an altitude of about 27 km.
The Scud C modeled in this analysis has a range of 615 km with a payload
of 700 kg, a burn time of 85 seconds, and a burnout altitude of approximately
50 km. The No Dong burns out in 95 seconds at an altitude of approximately
70 km. Figure A2 illustrates intermediate-range, two-stage, Taepo Dong 1 and
Taepo Dong 2 boost phases with nominal burn times of 165 and 193 seconds, and
burnout altitudes of approximately 150 and 210 km, respectively, along with
the three stage, 240-second ICBM with a burnout altitude of approximately
190 km for a maximum-range trajectory.
Figure A3 illustrates the variation in ICBM burnout altitudes that occur for
lofted, minimum energy, and depressed trajectories against cities at different
range from a North Korean launch location for the 240-second ICBM.48 As one
can see, burnout altitude variations are greater against targets at short ranges
and for eastward trajectories (due to the larger component of the Earth’s rota-
tional speed) because more propellant exists for lofting or depressing the tra-
jectory. For example, North Korean launches against Anchorage, Alaska have
the largest variation, while launches against Boston show the least. Note that
the variation in burnout altitudes for ICBMs can be as large as 350 km.
Figure A4 illustrates the acceleration pro ﬁles for several medium and
intermediate-range ballistic missiles. The No Dong has the highest peak
=== page 63 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 63
Figure A1: Scud B, Scud C, and no Dong boost phases.
Figure A2: Taepo Dong 1, Taepo Dong 2, and ICBM boost phases.
=== page 64 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
64 Wilkening
Figure A3: 240-sec ICBM burnout points for different trajectories.
Figure A4: Acceleration proﬁles for medium-range ballistic missiles.
=== page 65 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 65
Figure A5: Acceleration proﬁles for ICBMs.
Figure A6: Missile range degradation vs. premature thrust termination.
=== page 66 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
66 Wilkening
acceleration among those modeled in this analysis, reaching nearly 11 g at
its maximum. Typical accelerations several seconds before booster burnout are
between 5 g and 6 g. Figure A5 illustrates the acceleration proﬁle for the three
ICBMs modeled in this analysis. While peak ICBM accelerations may reach
10 g, typical accelerations several seconds before burnout are in the range 6–8g .
The high acceleration at the end of the boost phase imparts considerable ve-
locity to the payload and, hence, contributes substantially to a missile’s range,
especially for intercontinental-range missiles due to the earth’s curvature. Con-
versely, if a missile’s thrust is terminated prematurely by several seconds, its
range is degraded substantially. Figure A6 illustrates this range degradation
as a function of the premature thrust termination in seconds. Terminating a
ballistic missile’s thrust prematurely by 5 seconds typically decreases its range
by 15 to 30 percent.
Figures A7 and A8 illustrate the range shortfall for ICBM trajectories
launched from North Korea and Iran, respectively, towards the United States.
Intercepting North Korean or Iranian ICBMs two to four seconds before
booster burnout causes the payload to fall north of the U.S.-Canadian border.49
Figure A7: North Korean ICBM trajectories toward the United States.
=== page 67 ===
TJ1121-05 SGS.cls June 4, 2004 15:35
Airborne Boost-Phase Ballistic Missile Defense 67
Figure A8: Iranian ICBM trajectories toward the United States.
Intercepting North Korean or Iranian ICBMs approximately 10 seconds be-
fore burnout ensures that the payload will fall short of North America, except
for North Korean trajectories that pass over Alaska. Intercepts that occur 10 to
30 seconds before burnout would cause the payload to fall relatively harmlessly
into the Artic or North Atlantic Oceans, except for North Korean trajectories
that pass over Alaska and Iranian trajectories that pass over Greenland. North
Korean ICBMs intercepted more than 30 seconds before burnout would cause
the debris to fall in Siberia. Similarly, Iranian ICBMs intercepted 25 –30 sec-
onds before burnout would cause the payload and debris to land in northern
Russia or Europe. Given uncertainties in the exact ICBM burnout time (due to
uncertainties in the exact launch time, physical variations in a missile ’s burn
rate, and trajectory variations) that cannot be eliminated prior to launching a
boost-phase interceptor, it will be very dif ﬁcult if not impossible to intercept
the target booster within the narrow time window that guarantees that debris
will not fall on friendly territory.
