=== page 1 ===
Modeling the Performance of Hypersonic
Boost-Glide Missiles
Cameron L. Tracy a and David Wright b
aGlobal Security Program, Union of Concerned Scientists, Cambridge, MA, USA; bDepartment of
Nuclear Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
ABSTRACT
The United States, Russia, and China are developing an array
of hypersonic weapons —maneuverable vehicles that carry
warheads through the atmosphere at more than five times
the speed of sound. Proponents claim that these weapons
outperform existing missiles in terms of delivery time and eva-
sion of early warning systems. Here, we report computational
modeling of hypersonic boost-glide missile flight which shows
that these weapons travel intercontinental distances more
slowly than comparable ballistic missiles flying depressed tra-
jectories, and that they remain visible to existing space-based
sensors for the majority of flight. Fundamental physical limita-
tions imposed by low-altitude atmospheric flight render
hypersonic missiles an evolutionary —not revolutionary —
development relative to established ballistic missile technolo-
gies. Misperceptions of hypersonic weapon performance have
arisen from social processes by which the organizations devel-
oping these weapons construct erroneous technical facts
favoring continued investment. The modeling reported here
provides a basis for rigorous, quantitative analysis of hyper-
sonic weapon performance.
Introduction
Hypersonic weapons comprise an emerging class of missile technologies —
maneuverable vehicles that carry warheads through the atmosphere at more
than five times the speed of sound. 1 Their flight characteristics are distinct
from those of typical ballistic missiles, which spend most of flight above
the atmosphere and are capable of only limited maneuverability, and from
those of subsonic or supersonic cruise missiles, which travel through the
atmosphere but fly more slowly.
The United States, China, and Russia are currently racing to develop
these weapons, and each plans to field a wide array of hypersonic systems
in the coming decades. 2 The most recent U.S. defense budget, for example,
CONTACT Cameron L. Tracy ctracy@ucsusa.org Global Security Program, Union of Concerned Scientists, 2
Brattle, Square, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
/C2232021 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY
2020, VOL. 28, NO. 3, 135 – 170
https://doi.org/10.1080/08929882.2020.1864945
=== page 2 ===
dedicates $3.2 billion to hypersonic weapon programs, representing about
3% of the total defense research and development budget. 3 China is also
investing heavily in both hypersonic development infrastructure and
weapon systems, reportedly outpacing the United States in testing of these
technologies.4 Russia, reportedly the first nation to deploy a hypersonic
missile, characterizes these weapons as a centerpiece of its security strategy
and has extensively tested at least three distinct hypersonic systems. 5
This nascent hypersonic arms race is premised on claims that the sup-
posedly unprecedented capabilities of these weapons portend a revolution
in missile warfare — claims that pervade the news media, governmental
statements, and the scholarly literature. Hypersonic missiles are commonly
depicted as a “game changer. ”6 With allegedly “unmatched speed, ” these
weapons are said to “hit over-the-horizon targets in a fraction of the time
it would take existing ballistic or cruise missiles. ”7 In short, proponents
assert that “developments in hypersonic propulsion will revolutionize war-
fare by providing the ability to strike targets more quickly. ”8 This claimed
speed advantage is ostensibly accompanied by near-immunity to detection,
rendering hypersonic weapons “nearly invisible ” to existing early warning
systems.9 Together, these capabilities will purportedly “greatly compress
decision and response times ” in a hypersonic strike, leaving those targeted
with “insufficient time … to confidently identify and confirm the nature of
an incoming attack, let alone to decide how to respond. ”10
Despite these claims, the precise capabilities of hypersonic missiles
remain uncertain and controversial. In contrast to the common depiction
of these weapons as a revolution in missile warfare, several recent analyses
suggest they may offer minimal advantage over existing missile technolo-
gies.11 Detailed, quantitative, open-source technical assessment is necessary
to clarify the capabilities of this emerging technology and its probable
effects on international security.
This article reports the results of computational modeling of hypersonic
boost-glide vehicle flight. Our analysis indicates that a hypersonic missile
will travel intercontinental distances more slowly than a comparable ballis-
tic missile flying a depressed trajectory. Furthermore, hypersonic missiles
will remain visible to existing space-based early warning systems for the
majority of flight. Ultimately, these results show the performance and stra-
tegic implications of hypersonic weapons to be broadly comparable to those
of established ballistic missile technologies. While hypersonic weapons
exhibit some modest advantages in terms of, for example, maneuverability,
fundamental physical limitations imposed by low-altitude atmospheric
flight render these weapons at best an evolutionary — not revolutionary —
advancement. The persistence of misperceptions regarding hypersonic
weapon performance has resulted from social processes by which erroneous
136 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 3 ===
technical facts have been socially constructed and promulgated by organiza-
tions developing these weapons.
The first section of this article presents a mathematical model of the
flight of a notional hypersonic vehicle. Computational results, and their
implications for hypersonic weapon performance, are presented next. The
last section examines the social origins of misperceptions regarding hyper-
sonic weapon capabilities. The article concludes with discussion of further
questions regarding hypersonic weapon capabilities which the modeling
approach reported here might address.
Computational modeling of hypersonic flight
Hypersonic weapons can be sorted into two distinct categories: cruise mis-
siles and boost-glide vehicles. 12 The former operate much like typical sub-
sonic and supersonic cruise missiles — using air-breathing engines to power
themselves through the atmosphere — but fly at higher speeds. Yet hyper-
sonic cruise missiles are unlikely to match the speeds or ranges achievable
by boost-glide vehicles, which are accelerated to extremely high velocities
on rocket boosters similar to those used to launch ballistic missiles. They
then proceed to glide, unpowered, through the upper atmosphere until
reaching their target. Because boost-glide systems represent the forefront of
hypersonic missile performance in terms of speed and range, and because
they are the focus of most current development activity, our analysis
focuses on this class of missile.
Typical flight of a hypersonic boost-glide weapon can be divided into six
stages: boost, ballistic, reentry, pull-up, glide, and terminal phases. 13 In the
boost phase, a rocket booster accelerates the missile carrying the hypersonic
vehicle until the booster exhausts its fuel, at which point it detaches from
the glide vehicle and falls back to Earth. In the ballistic phase, the vehicle
travels above the atmosphere on a ballistic trajectory under only the influ-
ence of gravity. Both of these phases are comparable to a ballistic missile
launch. Hypersonic trajectories diverge from those of ballistic missiles in
the reentry and pull-up phases. Here, the vehicle pierces the upper atmos-
phere, then slows its descent to enter a stable glide trajectory. In the glide
phase, the vehicle generates aerodynamic lift to sustain near-level flight.
Finally, in the terminal phase, the glider dives toward its target.
We model the boost and ballistic phases using standard equations of
motion for ballistic missile flight ( Appendix).14 The complex dynamics of
the pull-up phase, which are difficult to accurately simulate with the avail-
able data on glide vehicle parameters, are treated analytically using a simple
mathematical approach reported by Acton. 15 We have developed a new
computational model to simulate in detail the glide and terminal phases,
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 137
=== page 4 ===
which constitute the majority of a typical long-range hypersonic
flight trajectory.
The notional glide vehicle modeled here is based on the Hypersonic
Technology Vehicle 2 (HTV-2), an experimental glider jointly developed
and tested by the U.S. Air Force and the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA). 16 This system is commonly considered a proto-
typical intercontinental-range hypersonic glide vehicle. Several recent analy-
ses of its flight characteristics have been published in the open literature,
providing useful data for modeling. 17 We assume a roughly triangular pyr-
amidal geometry based on that reported by Niu et al., as shown in
Figure 1 .18 Based on prior analysis of HTV-2 test flights, we assume a
glider mass of m ¼ 1,000 kg, a constant lift-to-drag ratio of L/D ¼ 2.6, and a
ballistic coefficient of b ¼ m/(CdA) ¼ 13,000 kg/m2, where Cd is the drag
coefficient and A is the effective glider cross-sectional area. 19 These aero-
dynamic parameters are in good agreement with those reported elsewhere
for wedge-shaped hypersonic gliders. 20
Flight trajectory
We model atmospheric flight in the glide and terminal phases over a spher-
ical, non-rotating Earth using the three-dimensional coordinate system
illustrated in Figure 2 . Four forces govern flight trajectories in this model:
gravity, lift, drag, and an apparent centrifugal force. The influence of these
forces is expressed in six equations of motion describing velocity ( v), flight
angles measured relative to the local horizontal ( c) and azimuthally from
7.6°
11.3°
6.1°
19.1°
rnose = 0.034 m
rbottom = 5.7 m
rtop = 0.95 m
rwing = 0.16 m
3.67 m
0.77 m
2.2 
m
0.88 
m
Figure 1. The HTV-2 glider geometry used in this analysis. Because we obtain aerodynamic
parameters (ballistic coefficient and lift-to-drag ratio) from analysis of flight test data, our trajec-
tory results are insensitive to the assumed vehicle geometry. Calculated surface heating and
infrared light emission, however, do depend on this geometry.
138 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 5 ===
the down-range direction ( j), down-range angle over Earth ( W), cross-
range angle over Earth ( X), and altitude ( h), all as a function of time:
dv
dt ¼/C0 CdA
2m qv2/C0 gsinc (1)
dc
dt ¼ vcosc
re þ h þ L/C14
D
/C16/C17CdA
2m
/C18/C19
qvcosr/C0 g
v cosc (2)
dj
dt ¼ L/C14
D
/C16/C17CdA
2m
/C18/C19
qvsinr
cosc (3)
dW
dt ¼ vcosccosj
re
(4)
dX
dt ¼ vcoscsinj
re
(5)
dh
dt ¼ vsinc (6)
where Cd is the vehicle ’s drag coefficient, A is its effective cross-sectional
area, m is its mass, q is the atmospheric density, g is the acceleration due
to gravity, re is Earth ’s radius, L/D is the vehicle ’s lift-to-drag ratio, and r
is the vehicle ’s roll angle. 21 We calculate atmospheric density using the
1976 U.S. Standard Atmosphere. Down-range and cross-range distances,
measured over Earth ’s surface, are given by Wre and Xre, respectively.
Start of
glide
Velocity
Local
horizontal
Earth
h
Ψ γre
Start of
glide
Ω
κ
Cross range
Velocity
Earth
Side view Overhead view
Down rang
e
direction
Figure 2. The coordinate system used in the hypersonic flight model, shown from both side
(left) and overhead (right) perspectives. Six trajectory variables are modeled: velocity ( v), flight
angles relative to the local horizontal (c) and measured azimuthally from the down-range direc-
tion ( j), down-range angle over Earth ( W), cross-range angle over Earth ( X), and altitude ( h).
Down-range and cross-range distances, measured over Earth ’s surface, are given by Wre and
Xre, respectively.
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 139
=== page 6 ===
We simulate flight beginning with a velocity vector oriented horizontal
to Earth ’s surface. We assume an initial equilibrium altitude at which
vehicle weight is equal to the sum of the lift generated by the vehicle and
the apparent centrifugal force arising from its flight over a spherical Earth,
as given by:
L/C14
D
/C16/C17
qv2g
2b þ v2
re
/C0 g ¼ 0 (7)
We calculate the glide trajectory by integrating the equations of motion
(Equations (1) –(6)) over time using a second-order Runge-Kutta (mid-
point) method. Maneuvering is simulated via variation of the glide vehicle
roll angle; for nonzero angles a portion of the lift force acts in the horizon-
tal direction, perpendicular to the vehicle ’s velocity direction.
In the terminal phase we model an inverted dive maneuver in which the
glider turns upside down (corresponding to a roll angle of r ¼ 180/C14 ), such
that the lift force is oriented toward the ground. This yields a faster, more
efficient traversal of the dense lower atmosphere. 22 An inverted dive was
reportedly used in flight tests of the HTV-2. 23
Aerothermal heating
As a glider traverses dense atmosphere at hypersonic speeds, shock waves
form in the nearby air. Much of the kinetic energy the glider loses as it is
slowed by atmospheric drag is transferred to this surrounding air, yielding
intense aerothermal heating. A portion of this heat is deposited to the
vehicle, producing extreme temperatures on its outer surfaces.
To model this heating, we consider the case of turbulent gas flow over a
non-ablative, catalytic glider surface. We calculate heat transfer to this sur-
face using phenomenological equations reported by Tauber et al. for heat
transfer in hypersonic flows. 24 At the stagnation point (the tip of the glider
leading edge), the heat flux to the vehicle surface is approximated as:
dq
dt
/C18/C19
SP
¼ 1:83 /C2 10/C0 4
ﬃﬃﬃﬃrn
p 1 /C0 hw
h0
/C18/C19
q0:5v3 (8)
where dq/dt is the heat flux in J/m 2s, rn is the radius of the glider ’s leading
edge in m (0.034 m for the glider geometry shown in Figure 1 ), hw is the
vehicle wall enthalpy per unit mass, h0 is the stagnation enthalpy per unit
mass, q is the atmospheric density in kg/m 3, and v is the vehicle velocity
relative to air in m/s. The stagnation enthalpy is approximated as h0 ¼ v2/2
þ (2.3 /C2 105 J/kg), and the wall enthalpy as hw ¼ 1,000 Tw J/kg, where Tw
is the wall temperature in K. 25
140 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 7 ===
We calculate heating of the remainder of the vehicle surface by approxi-
mating it as a triangular pyramid with four sides (two on the upper surface,
one on the lower, and the base of the pyramid at the rear of the glider) ori-
ented at different angles relative to the air flow direction. This allows for
the use of phenomenological equations, again obtained from Tauber et al.,
for heat transfer to flat plates in turbulent hypersonic flow. When
v > 4 km/s:
dq
dt
/C18/C19
FP
¼ 2:2 /C2 10/C0 5 coshðÞ 2:08
sinhðÞ 1:6
x0:2
 !
1 /C0 1:11hw
h0
/C18/C19
q0:8v3:7 (9)
and when v /C20 4 km/s:
dq
dt
/C18/C19
FP
¼ 3:89 /C2 10/C0 4 coshðÞ 1:78
sinhðÞ 1:6
x0:2
 !
1 /C0 1:11hw
h0
/C18/C19
556
Tw
/C16/C170:25
q0:8v3:37
(10)
where h is the angle between the vehicle surface and the freestream flow, x
is the distance along the vehicle surface in meters, and Tw is the tempera-
ture of the vehicle wall in K. This approach shows good agreement with
the results of computational fluid dynamics calculations. 26
As heat flows from the surrounding gas to the surface of a hypersonic
vehicle, that surface simultaneously sheds heat through thermal radiation.
Assuming a non-ablative aeroshell with a perfectly insulated interior and
neglecting thermal conduction along the shell, a glider in steady-state flight
will achieve thermal equilibrium at the radiative-adiabatic limit. 27 At this
limit, the heat flux from the gas to the vehicle is equal to the heat flux radi-
ated by its surface, as given by the Stefan-Boltzmann law:
dq
dt
/C18/C19
rad
¼ erTw4 (11)
where e is the surface emissivity and r is the Stefan –Boltzmann constant. 28
We take the emissivity of the HTV-2 ’s carbon aeroshell to be e ¼ 0.85.29
Setting Equations (8) , (9),o r (10) equal to Equation (11) yields Tw as a
function of position on the surface of the vehicle.
Thermal radiation in the infrared spectrum
The surface of a hypersonic glide vehicle typically reaches temperatures of
thousands of Kelvin during glide, producing substantial thermal radiation
across the infrared (IR) spectrum. 30 When sufficiently intense, this IR sig-
nature can be detected by space-based IR sensors of the sort that the
United States and Russia use in their missile early warning systems. 31
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 141
=== page 8 ===
To quantify this IR emission, we calculate the spectral radiance L (radi-
ant flux per unit solid angle per unit projected area per unit frequency) of
a glider using Planck ’s law:
L k, TwðÞ ¼ 2ehc2
k5
/C18/C19
1
e
hc
kkBT /C0 1
/C18/C19
(12)
where k is the wavelength of light, h is the Planck constant, c is the speed
of light, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. 32 We then double integrate
Equation (12) over the wavelength band of interest and the observed area
of the glider surface, yielding the total observed radiant intensity (radiant
flux per unit solid angle) of the vehicle. The results reported here assume
an observer situated directly overhead; alternate viewing angles would
increase or decrease the observed intensity in proportion to the corre-
sponding change in observed area. Atmospheric attenuation has a minor
effect on IR transmission to satellites from typical hypersonic flight alti-
tudes (tens of kilometers), and is therefore neglected. 33
Computational results
Flight trajectory
The flight of a hypersonic vehicle in the glide and terminal phases is gov-
erned, in large part, by atmospheric drag. While ballistic missiles spend the
majority of their flight in outer space where air density is negligible, hyper-
sonic glide takes place within the atmosphere where air density is suffi-
ciently high to generate the lift necessary for sustained flight. As expressed
in a glider ’s L/D parameter, the generation of lift is unavoidably accompa-
nied by the proportional generation of drag. This drag reduces a glider ’s
velocity, which in turn limits its achievable range and maneuver-
ing capability.
Figure 3 shows the calculated glide phase velocity of the modeled hyper-
sonic vehicle as a function of glide range for flight straight down-range
with no cross-range maneuvering. Data are presented for a range of initial
glide velocities, which will vary with the booster rocket and the boost, reen-
try, and pull-up trajectories chosen for a particular hypersonic missile
launch. Based on Acton ’s analysis of HTV-2 flight tests, initial glide veloc-
ities of roughly 6 km/s can be considered typical for intercontinental-range
systems.34 In all cases, drag rapidly slows the glider. For example, the vel-
ocity of a missile beginning glide at v ¼ 6 km/s is halved after 6,000 km
of glide.
As a glider ’s velocity decreases due to drag, its equilibrium flight altitude
also decreases, assuming a constant value of L/D and a constant relation-
ship between v and the generated lift ( Equation (7) ).35 Thus, as it slows, a
142 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 9 ===
glider must drop to lower altitudes where denser air can provide sufficient
lift to keep it aloft. Continuous hypersonic flight is therefore constrained to
a relatively narrow altitude-velocity corridor. 36 Figure 4 shows calculated
glide altitudes as a function of glide range under the same flight conditions
considered in Figure 3 .
These results show good agreement with the prior literature. For
example, Acton estimated an achievable range of /C24 7,500 km for an HTV-2
with an initial glide speed of 6.1 km/s and initial glide altitude of /C24 50 km.37
For these conditions, our model predicts a similar maximum range
of 7,630 km.
Drag effects on glide speed and altitude limit the achievable hypersonic
missile delivery times. Figure 5 displays the calculated glide time necessary
for the modeled vehicle to reach a certain glide range. At long ranges, such
as those associated with intercontinental strikes, the drag penalty on deliv-
ery time can be substantial.
While the above analysis concerns straight flight in the down-range dir-
ection, drag also limits cross-range maneuverability. Figure 6 shows the cal-
culated flight paths of a glider maneuvering in the cross-range direction
using a variety of vehicle roll angles. The ends of these flight paths approxi-
mately trace one-half of the area threatened by a missile initially gliding in
the down-range direction. While substantial cross-range maneuvering is
possible, it entails a reduction in the total flight path length. This is because
a glider must roll in order to turn, redirecting a portion of the lift force
toward the cross-range direction. The corresponding reduction in the lift
force acting counter to gravity results in a faster loss of altitude and, there-
fore, velocity. 38
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Speed (km/
s)
Glide range (km)
6.5 km/s6 km/s5.5 km/sv=
5km/s
0 7km/s
Figure 3. Hypersonic vehicle speed as a function of glide range for various initial glide speeds,
illustrating how atmospheric drag slows the vehicle throughout the glide phase.
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 143
=== page 10 ===
Comparison with ballistic missiles
The strategic implications of hypersonic weaponry depend on its perform-
ance relative to that of ballistic missiles, which currently represent the
state-of-the-art in fast, long-range warhead delivery. 39 Long-range ballistic
missiles reach velocities comparable to those of hypersonic boost-glide sys-
tems, since they are launched on similar or identical rocket boosters.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Altitude (km)
Glide range (km)
7km/
s
6.5 km/s6 km/
s
5.5
km/
s
v=
5k m / s
0
Figure 4. Hypersonic vehicle altitude as a function of glide range for various initial speeds. As
drag slows the vehicle, the lift it generates (at a constant angle of attack) decreases. The glider
therefore drops to lower altitude, at which increased atmospheric density yields a greater lift
force for the same velocity. Minor oscillations about the equilibrium flight altitude, called phu-
goid motion, result from the dynamics of this process. These could be damped by active con-
trol of the vehicle.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Glide time (min)
Glide range (km)
7 km/s
6.5 km/s6 km/s
5.5 km/
s
v= 5 k m / s0
7 km/s, no drag
Figure 5. Glide time as a function of glide range for various initial speeds. The gray dashed
line corresponds to an initial speed of 7 km/s in the absence of atmospheric drag. Curvature of
the solid lines results from the effects of atmospheric drag.
144 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 11 ===
Unlike gliders, they then spend most of their flight high above the atmos-
phere where they are not subjected to drag forces. However, this high, arc-
ing flight increases the flight path length necessary to reach a given range,
relative to the low-altitude flight paths of hypersonic gliders.
To determine the relative capabilities of hypersonic and ballistic missiles
we modeled intercontinental-range flight of both missile types, comparing
their flight times and reentry speeds. 40 To facilitate comparison, identical
Minotaur IV booster rockets were modeled in both cases. This three-stage,
solid-fueled modification of the Peacekeeper intercontinental ballistic mis-
sile (ICBM) was used in flight testing of the HTV-2 and has been consid-
ered for future use in deployed U.S. hypersonic weapons. 41 Booster
parameters were obtained from prior analysis by Wright. 42
For the hypersonic case, we modeled a boost phase trajectory based on
that used in HTV-2 flight testing. 43 For the reentry and pull-up phases, we
used Acton ’s results from analysis of HTV-2 flight tests. 44 Under these
assumptions, the hypersonic vehicle begins its pull-up phase, after reenter-
ing the atmosphere, at a speed of 7.1 km/s. It subsequently begins glide
3,100 km down-range from its launch point, 10.1 minutes after launch, at
an altitude of 49 km and a speed of 6.1 km/s.
For the ballistic case, we modeled two distinct trajectories. 45 The first is
a typical minimum energy trajectory (MET), which is the most energy-effi-
cient trajectory for a given range. It sends the warhead arcing over
1,000 km above Earth before it falls to its target. For this trajectory, the
rocket booster burn time was varied to achieve the desired missile range.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Cross-range (km)
Down-range (km)
Figure 6. Flight trajectories of vehicles beginning glide with v ¼ 6 km/s and roll angles varying
in 5 /C14 increments from 0 to 70 /C14 . To maximize cross-range travel, the roll angle is reset to 0 /C14
once the glider is traveling directly cross-range. The ends of these flight paths trace one half of
the approximate area threatened by a missile at the start of glide.
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 145
=== page 12 ===
The second is a depressed trajectory (DT), so named because the missile
turns sharply toward the down-range direction during the boost phase,
yielding a small angle with respect to the local horizontal at the end of
boost and, consequently, a much lower apogee. This trajectory reduces the
missile’s total flight path length necessary to reach a given range, compared
with a minimum energy trajectory, resulting in shorter delivery times. The
depressed trajectory calculation assumes a boost phase turn similar to, but
less severe than, that used in HTV-2 flight testing. 46 The flight angle at
booster burn-out was varied to achieve the desired missile range. To facili-
tate direct comparison with the hypersonic case, we assume a ballistic mis-
sile reentry vehicle mass of 1,000 kg (equal to the HTV-2 mass used in this
modeling) so that the two systems exhibit essentially the same speed at
booster burn-out. 47
Figure 7 shows the resulting trajectories for hypersonic and ballistic mis-
siles delivered to targets 8,100 km away from the launch point (correspond-
ing to 5,000 km glide, in the hypersonic case). Figure 8 shows the total
warhead delivery time, from launch to impact, for each missile as a func-
tion of range.
These results show that hypersonic weapons cannot match the short
delivery times of ballistic missiles flying on depressed trajectories, although
they exhibit a modest delivery time advantage over ballistic missiles flying
minimum energy trajectories. In short, hypersonic missiles are slower than
ballistic missiles over intercontinental ranges. Claims that the advent of
hypersonic weaponry will reduce the time necessary for warhead delivery
between, for example, the United States, Russia, and China, are false.
Currently deployed long-range ballistic missiles are not designed to man-
euver during reentry, either to increase accuracy or evade defenses.
However, the United States has developed and tested several maneuvering
reentry vehicles (MaRVs), which could be deployed on existing ballistic
missiles.48 Use of a lifting reentry body on a ballistic missile to enable
maneuvering in the terminal phase, as the hypersonic glider does, would
reduce delivery times slightly. For example, we find that a lifting reentry
vehicle with L/D ¼ 1, which is achievable using a simple biconic geometry,
would reduce the depressed trajectory delivery time by approximately one-
quarter to one-half of a minute, depending on range. 49
Flight speed in the terminal phase influences the vulnerability of a mis-
sile to interception by defensive systems. Figure 9 compares vehicle veloc-
ities as a function of altitude shortly before impact at two total ranges:
6,100 km and 8,600 km (corresponding to 3,000 km and 5,500 km glide in
the hypersonic case). 50
The hypersonic vehicle, because it has been slowed by drag throughout
its glide phase, begins the terminal phase at a lower velocity than either
146 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 13 ===
ballistic missile. However, it maintains much of its speed throughout this
phase via a highly efficient inverted dive maneuver, which puts it on a
steep trajectory through the dense lower atmosphere ( Figure 7(c) ). In the
ballistic minimum energy trajectory, the reentry vehicle approaches its tar-
get at a similarly steep angle and, due to its higher velocity at the start of
the terminal phase, travels faster than the hypersonic glider for most or all
of this phase.
The depressed trajectory ballistic missile reenters the atmosphere at a
shallow angle relative to the minimum-energy trajectory case, increasing
the amount of time it spends traversing the atmosphere and enhancing the
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Altitude (km)
Range (km)
Hypersonic glide
Ballistic depressed trajectory
Ballistic minimum
energy trajectory
(a)
7800 7900 8000 8100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Altitude (km)
Range (km)
0 100 200 300
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Altitude (km)
Range (km)
(b) (c)
Figure 7. Calculated flight paths of a hypersonic glider and a ballistic missile flying minimum
energy and depressed trajectories, fired at a target 8,100 km down-range. All missiles use identi-
cal Minotaur IV boosters. The hypersonic and ballistic depressed trajectory launches use similar
boost phase trajectories based on those used in HTV-2 flight tests. The dashed section of the
hypersonic curve represents analytic results rather than detailed modeling. Part (a) shows the
total flight paths, while parts (b) and (c) show details of the boost and terminal phases at the
start and end of missile flight. The hypersonic and depressed trajectory missiles make relatively
sharp turns toward the down-range direction during the boost phase, and the depressed trajec-
tory vehicle reenters the atmosphere at a relatively shallow angle.
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 147
=== page 14 ===
effects of drag. While it begins the terminal phase at a higher velocity than
the hypersonic glider, it loses much of this speed by the time it approaches
the target. Equipping the missile with a lifting reentry vehicle, as discussed
above, would allow it to more quickly dive to the ground and to maintain
speeds higher than that of the hypersonic glider throughout the ter-
minal phase.
01234567
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Altitude (km)
Velocity (km/s)
01234567
Velocity (km/s)
Hypersonic glide
Ballistic DT
Ballistic MET
Range = 6100 km Range = 8600 km
Ballistic DT (lifting)
Figure 9. Terminal phase speed as a function of altitude for hypersonic gliders and ballistic
reentry vehicles approaching targets at 6,100 km (left) and 8,100 km (right) ranges. The dashed
line corresponds to a depressed trajectory ballistic missile armed with a lifting reentry vehicle
(L/D ¼ 1). For most or all of the terminal phase the hypersonic glider is slower than the ballistic
missile reentry vehicles, with the exception of the ballistic depressed trajectory using a non-lift-
ing reentry vehicle.
6000 6500 7000 7500 8000 8500
15
20
25
30
35
Delivery time (min
)
Range (km)
Hypersonic glide
Ballistic DT
Ballistic MET
Figure 8. Calculated total delivery times for a hypersonic missile and a ballistic missile flying
both minimum energy and depressed trajectories. Delivery times include boost, ballistic, reentry,
pull-up, glide, and terminal phases, where applicable. Ballistic missiles fired on depressed trajec-
tories reach their targets most quickly. Their delivery time advantage over hypersonic gliders
increases with range.
148 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 15 ===
Detection, tracking, and early warning
In addition to their purported speed advantage, it is often claimed that
hypersonic weapons can bypass existing early warning systems, further
attenuating adversary response times. To be sure, their low-altitude flight
significantly reduces the range at which they can be detected by ground-
based radar systems compared with ballistic missiles, since Earth ’s curva-
ture blocks a radar ’s line-of-sight to a low-flying glider at distances of more
than a few hundred kilometers. 51 The formation of a high-temperature
plasma sheathe around a hypersonic glider might also alter its radar
cross section. 52
However, two states at the forefront of the hypersonic arms race, the
United States and Russia, do not rely solely on ground-based radar to
detect missile attacks; both have fielded space-based sensors since the
1970s.53 China is reportedly developing its own space-based early warning
system with assistance from Russia. 54 These satellite-mounted IR detectors
are designed to spot the bright rocket plumes produced by ballistic mis-
sile launches.
Space-based IR sensors will also detect the launch of hypersonic boost-
glide weapons, since they are launched on large rockets similar to those
used with ICBMs. Moreover, hypersonic glide through the atmosphere pro-
duces immense heating of glide vehicles and the surrounding air, yielding
strong IR signatures that, when sufficiently intense, can be detected by
space-based sensors. Thus, while hypersonic weapons might bypass some
components of early warning systems, they are particularly vulnerable
to others.
To quantify the visibility of hypersonic gliders to space-based IR sensors,
we modeled the heating and thermal radiation of these vehicles. Figure 10
shows, as an example, the calculated temperature distribution along the
centerline of the upper surface of a glider traveling at v ¼ 6 km/s at its equi-
librium glide altitude of h ¼ 49.7 km. Our results show good agreement
with prior computational fluid dynamics calculations by Niu et al. 55 For
example, they report temperatures along the upper surface centerline,
excluding the vehicle ’s rounded nose tip, in the range 2,060 –1,130 K for
glide at a velocity of v ¼ 5.4 km/s and an altitude of h ¼ 60 km. Our model
predicts temperatures in the range 1,950 –1,310 K under the same
conditions.56
These surface temperatures vary with the velocity of the glider and the
density of the surrounding air ( Equations (8) –(10)). Figure 11 shows the
temperature evolution as a function of glide range at a point on the glider
centerline 1 m behind the vehicle nose. 57 These temperatures are far in
excess of those experienced by ballistic missiles during their mid-course
flight through outer space, which are typically below 300 K. 58
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 149
=== page 16 ===
These extreme temperatures give rise to intense emission of radiation in
the IR spectrum. Our calculated radiance results again agree well with pre-
viously reported values. For example, Niu et al. calculated overhead radiant
intensities of /C24 105 kW/sr in the 3 –5 mm band and /C24 14 kW/sr in the
8–12 mm band for a vehicle traveling at v ¼ 5.4 km/s at an altitude of
h ¼ 60 km.59 Our model yields similar overhead radiant intensities of
113 kW/sr in the 3 –5 mm band and 15 kW/sr in the 8 –12 mm band for the
same flight conditions.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Temperature at 
x = 1 m (K)
Glide range (km)
7km/s
6.5 km/s6km/s
5.5 km/sv =5k m / s
0
Figure 11. Glider centerline surface temperatures at a position 1 m behind the vehicle nose as
a function of glide time for various initial speeds. Oscillations arise from the altitude variation
shown in Figure 4 . The discontinuities seen at T /C25 1,600 K are caused by the switch from
Equation (9) to Equation (10) when the vehicle slows to v /C20 4 km/s.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
1600
2000
2400
2800
3200
T(
K)
x/L
Figure 10. Calculated glider centerline temperatures as a function of fractional position along
the vehicle length for flight at v ¼ 6 km/s and h ¼ 49.7 km. The discontinuity at x/L /C25 0.8 results
from a change in the slope of the glider ’s surface ( h) at this position.
150 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 17 ===
To assess the visibility of this IR emission to early warning systems, we
compared the calculated radiant intensities of a glider with the IR sensitiv-
ities of both existing U.S. space-based detection systems, using data avail-
able in the open literature. The U.S. space-based early warning system is
composed of two sets of satellites: the Defense Support Program (DSP),
first deployed in the 1970s, and the Space-Based Infrared System (SBIRS),
currently under development with the first satellite launched in 2011. 60
Modern DSP satellites use linear sensor arrays, /C24 6,000 pixels long, that
rotate to cover the visible disk of Earth in 10 second intervals. 61 This yields
spatial resolution on the order of 1 km and collection times on the order of
100 microseconds. 62 These sensors are tuned to a narrow wavelength band,
2.69–2.95 mm, where the atmosphere blocks most transmission of IR radi-
ation from the Earth ’s surface, reducing background signal. 63 The ability of
DSP satellites to observe even relatively dim, short-range missile launches
was established in the 1990 –1991 Gulf War, when they routinely detected
launches of Iraqi Scud missiles. 64 This allows for determination of an
approximate lower radiant intensity threshold for detection by DSP.
Assessing the available data on Scud IR emission, Garwin and Postol place
this threshold at /C24 20 kW/sr in the 2.69 –2.95 mm band. 65
Because hypersonic gliders are launched on large rockets, rocket plumes
from these launches will be readily detectable by existing space-based sen-
sors like the DSP. Furthermore, our results show that a hypersonic glider
would emit above the threshold for reliable detection by the DSP for a sub-
stantial portion of the glide phase. Figure 12 shows calculated glider radiant
intensities in the 2.69 –2.95 mm band as a function of range. For example, a
weapon entering glide at v ¼ 6 km/s would emit above the DSP detection
threshold for the first /C24 19 minutes of glide, corresponding to about three
quarters of its maximum glide range. 66 Based on DSP ’s spatial and time
resolution, it might conceivably provide tracking capability throughout this
period, as it does for ballistic missiles. 67
The more advanced SBIRS system could detect and track gliders for an
even longer portion of glide. While relatively little information on SBIRS
detection parameters is available in the open literature, a 2004 study by the
American Physical Society reports technical characteristics of a notional
SBIRS-like system. 68 This study assumes, based on commercially available
technology at the time of its writing, that a step-stare detector operating in
the short-wavelength infrared (SWIR) band (1.4 –3.0 mm) with a 1 km 2 pixel
footprint, 33 ms collection time, and 1 s revisit time reasonably approxi-
mates the likely performance of a SBIRS detector. 69 These parameters are
generally consistent with those proposed early in the SBIRS develop-
ment process. 70
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 151
=== page 18 ===
Accounting for the effects of atmospheric absorption, background signal,
etc., the APS study concludes that a notional SBIRS like system “could
detect sources with luminosities as low as 6 kW/sr [in the SWIR band]
with some margin of safety ” and could determine the three dimensional
position of such a source to within less than 300 m. 71 As shown in Figure
13, a hypersonic glider emits above this detection threshold for essentially
the entirety of glide. 72 This further indicates that hypersonic missiles can
be detected by existing space-based sensor technologies. Moreover, given
the predicted spatial precision of the SBIRS system and its short revisit
time, tracking hypersonic gliders through most of their flight is
likely feasible.
While hypersonic missiles will remain visible to space-based sensors
throughout much of their glide phase, for sufficiently long flights there
might exist short periods near the end of glide when the vehicle has slowed
enough that its radiant intensity drops below the threshold for detection.
For our model, the overhead radiant intensity drops below the SBIRS
detection threshold when the glider slows to v ¼ 1.6 km/s (around 26 km
altitude) and below the DSP threshold when it slows to v ¼ 3.5 km/s
(around 37 km altitude). Even with precise tracking up to this point, there
could remain a degree of uncertainty in the missile ’s subsequent trajectory
and its ultimate target. Still, this post-detection maneuvering will be strictly
limited by the reduced velocity of the vehicle at this stage. Figure 14 illus-
trates the calculated maximum achievable cross-range travel of a glider if
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
0
10
20
30
40
Radiant intensity,DSP band (kW/sr)
Glide range (km)
7k
m/s
6.5
km/s
6 km/s5.5 km/
s
v= 5 k m / s
0
DSP detection
threshold
Figure 12. Glider overhead radiant intensity in the DSP detection band (2.69 – 2.95 mm) as a
function of glide time for various initial speeds. In all cases glider radiance remains above the
approximate 20 kW/sr DSP detection threshold for the majority of glide. Oscillations arise from
the altitude variation shown in Figure 4 . The discontinuities seen at I /C25 25 kW/sr are caused by
the switch from Equation (9) to Equation (10) when the vehicle slows to v /C20 4 km/s.
152 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 19 ===
maneuvering is delayed until IR emission drops below a certain detec-
tion threshold.
For the 6 kW/sr detection threshold predicted for a SBIRS-like system in
the SWIR band, maximum cross-range flight of only /C24 200 km and down-
range flight of /C24 400 km would be possible once a glider had slowed
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000
0
100
200
300
400
Radiant intensity
, SWIR (kW/
sr)
Glide range (km)
7km/s
6.5
km/s
6k
m/
s
5.5 km
/s
v=
5 km/s
0
SBIRS detection
threshold
Figure 13. Glider overhead radiant intensity in the SWIR band (1.4 – 3.0 mm) as a function of
glide time for various initial speeds. In all cases glider radiance remains above the approximate
6 kW/sr SBIRS detection threshold for essentially the entire glide phase. Oscillations arise from
the altitude variation shown in Figure 4. The discontinuities seen at I /C25 200 kW/sr are caused by
the switch from Equation (9) to Equation (10) when the vehicle slows to v /C20 4 km/s.
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
Achievable post-thre
shold
cross range (km)
Detection threshold (kW/sr)
2.69 - 2.95 µm band
1.4 - 3.0 µm band
DSP
threshold
SBIRS threshold
Figure 14. The maximum achievable cross-range travel of a glider assuming that maneuvering
in the cross-range direction begins only once the glider ’s radiant intensity drops below a spe-
cific detection threshold. Data are shown for a range of detection thresholds in both the DSP
detection band (2.69 – 2.95 mm, upper line) and the notional SBIRS detection band (1.4 – 3.0 mm,
lower line). In both cases cross-range travel is limited to hundreds of kilometers.
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 153
=== page 20 ===
sufficiently to emit below this threshold (at velocities below the hypersonic
regime, as shown in Figure 3 ). At this point, the missile would threaten a
region roughly equivalent in area to Nicaragua or the U.S. state of
Pennsylvania. Thus, while some targeting uncertainty would remain even
after detection and tracking by space-based sensors, this uncertainty would
be tightly constrained by physical limitations on the maneuvering of a mis-
sile. Furthermore, this uncertainty pertains only to detection and tracking
by space-based sensors. As a glider approached to within a few hundred
kilometers of its target, it would become visible to ground-based radar sys-
tems that could provide continuity of tracking. 73
Misperceptions of hypersonic missile capabilities
This analysis demonstrates the falsity of common claims regarding the
capabilities of hypersonic weapons. Computational modeling indicates that
ballistic missiles fired on depressed trajectories can fly intercontinental dis-
tances significantly faster than can hypersonic boost-glide systems ( Figure
8). Furthermore, its shows that hypersonic weapons are not invulnerable to
detection by early warning systems but will instead remain visible to space-
based sensors during launch and the majority of the glide phase. They are
thus unlikely to meaningfully reduce the time available for a targeted
adversary to respond. 74
This misalignment between oft-repeated claims of hypersonic weapon
performance and their apparent technical capabilities raises several ques-
tions. How did these misconceptions originate? Why have they persisted?
Why are states so ardently pursuing weapon systems that do not perform
as advertised? Clearly, answers to these questions are not to be found in
the technical basis for hypersonic missile performance. Rather, they require
analysis of the processes by which technological facts regarding hypersonic
missile performance — delivery times, vulnerability to detection, etc. — have
been socially constructed. 75 Here, we consider the U.S. hypersonic program
as a representative case.
The social construction of technical facts
U.S. hypersonic missile development is led by the Department of Defense
(DOD), which currently oversees at least six distinct programs spread
across the military services and DARPA. 76 As shown in the modeling
results reported here, many of the justifications the DOD has offered for
hypersonic weapon development, based on their purportedly revolutionary
capabilities, do not hold up to technical scrutiny. Furthermore, several ana-
lysts have concluded that DOD planning in this area appears only weakly
154 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 21 ===
tied to any specific military mission or objective. 77 This suggests that fac-
tors unrelated to missile performance may be driving development.
The unique organizational predilections of the DOD illuminate several
possible factors. For example, Allison and Zelikow identify in DOD behav-
ior “effective imperatives to avoid … inferiority to an enemy weapon of any
class” or “a decrease in dollars budgeted. ”78 Both driving forces for weapon
development are independent of technical performance parameters. Instead,
they incentivize the pursuit of weapons that match those under develop-
ment by adversaries and that present opportunities for the capture of
budgetary resources — descriptions clearly applicable to hyper-
sonic weapons. 79
Yet while the DOD ’s pursuit of a missile technology may be only weakly
tied to technical capabilities, social conceptions of missile performance play
a key role in the marshaling of external support for weapons development.
The DOD alone cannot establish and carry out a missile development pro-
gram; it must enroll the support of others with different, potentially con-
flicting organizational interests, such as congressional appropriators.
In their sociological studies of U.S. ballistic missile development pro-
grams, MacKenzie and Spinardi show that this dynamic, in which propo-
nents of new missile technologies enroll the support of skeptical actors
external to their organizational unit, is typical of weapons development
efforts and begets particular social processes by which technical facts
regarding missile performance are socially constructed. 80 In these processes,
development of a new missile technology is not “a matter of engineering
just metal, wires, and equations. People [have] to be engineered, too. ”81
Success requires the engineering of a sociotechnical ensemble that “includes
both gyroscopes and Senators, and if one is seen not to work as intended,
the other may not either. ”82 DOD proponents of new missile technologies
construct these ensembles through processes termed “heterogeneous engi-
neering,” wherein technologists develop weapons that work, in a technical
sense, while simultaneously shaping social perceptions of what a “working”
system entails. 83
Establishing the credibility of technical claims regarding the advantages
of a weapon system is, according to MacKenzie, a “key role ” played by het-
erogeneous engineers. 84 To this end, they seek to construct technical facts
that cast their favored technology as desirable and necessary. 85 Thus, social
and organizational interests become embedded in ostensibly technical argu-
ments. The actual technical capabilities of a weapon are often subordinated
to these social factors: “whether [a missile] would actually perform to speci-
fication in a war situation is a moot point and not actually crucial to the
success of the technology … what matters is that the technology succeeds as
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 155
=== page 22 ===
a network of interests, ” incorporating political, organizational, financial,
and professional incentives. 86
In the United States, the DOD has acquired broad leeway to unilaterally
define the technical capabilities of hypersonic weapons. As Oelrich
observes, “virtually anyone in the United States who has a solid technical
understanding of hypersonic aerodynamics is working for the Defense
Department, one of the national laboratories, a contractor working for
Defense, or is a university researcher supported at least in part by Defense
Department grants. ”87 This near-monopoly on relevant technical expertise
is buttressed by a permissive culture among congressional appropriators.
Since they often lack the capacity for detailed technical analysis, “questions
of weapons technology are largely … left to those most imbued with that
particular culture, ” in this case DOD representatives. 88
Analysis of the U.S. hypersonic program through this sociological lens
reveals numerous examples of heterogeneous engineering on the part of
DOD officials, through which erroneous claims regarding the performance
of these weapons became embedded in dominant governmental, scholarly,
and media discourses. Here, we examine two representative instances rele-
vant to the issues discussed in this work — missile delivery times and visibil-
ity to space-based sensors.
Claim 1: Attenuated delivery times
It is commonly claimed that hypersonic weapons can reduce warhead deliv-
ery times by reaching their targets faster than existing ballistic missiles
could. In 2019 testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on Armed
Services, the Commander of U.S. Strategic Command addressed this deliv-
ery time issue. Asked how long it would take a Russian hypersonic glide
weapon to strike the United States, he responded: “it is a shorter period of
time. The ballistic missile is roughly 30 minutes. A hypersonic weapon,
depending on the design, could be half of that, depending on where it is
launched from, the platform. It could be even less than that. ”89
This comparison between hypersonic and ballistic missiles, phrased so as
to suggest that the former is intrinsically faster than the latter, is mislead-
ing. The 30-minute figure provided for a ballistic strike corresponds to a
missile launched from Russia on a minimum energy trajectory. 90 A ballistic
missile launched nearer to U.S. soil (e.g., from a submarine in the Pacific
Ocean) would reach its target much more quickly, as would one launched
on a depressed trajectory. As shown in Figure 8 , a hypersonic weapon
would take /C24 25 minutes to travel the distance between western Russia and
the eastern United States, making it only slightly faster than an ICBM
strike using a minimum energy trajectory, and slightly slower than an
ICBM strike using a depressed trajectory. The 15-minute figure provided to
156 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 23 ===
Congress corresponds to a hypersonic weapon launched much closer to
U.S. soil — an example of forward basing that is equally applicable to ballis-
tic missiles.
In this skillful demonstration of heterogeneous engineering, the delivery
time of a forward-based hypersonic missile was compared with that of a
ballistic missile launched from a much greater distance; this argument for
the advantages of forward basing was presented to legislators as an argu-
ment for the advantages of hypersonic missile technology. The implication
that a hypersonic missile could halve the time necessary to deliver a war-
head between Russia and the United States — while false — subsequently per-
meated the U.S. discourse, fueling narratives of the revolutionary nature of
these weapons. 91
Claim 2: Evasion of early warning systems
Even if it flew no faster than a ballistic missile, a hypersonic weapon might
still reduce adversary response times if it were able to bypass early warning
systems. In 2020, the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and
Engineering stated that hypersonic missiles are “20 times dimmer, or more,
than the targets [the United States is] able to track ” with its SBIRS satel-
lites, suggesting a need for new satellite sensors. 92 The Director of the
Missile Defense Agency told the Senate Committee on Armed Services that,
due to this dimness, a new satellite constellation would be necessary to
detect hypersonic missiles. 93
It is true that, in its glide phase, a hypersonic vehicle will not match the
>1 MW/sr IR intensity of the large rocket exhaust plumes that current
space-based sensors were designed to observe. 94 But this is not a particu-
larly relevant comparison. First, intercontinental-range hypersonic boost-
glide weapons are launched on the same rockets as are ICBMs. 95 Therefore,
hypersonic missile launches will not be appreciably dimmer than ICBM
launches. Second, IR emissions from hypersonic gliders will remain sub-
stantial long after launch ( Figure 12 ). The relevant comparison in this case
is not the IR intensity of a glider relative to that of a ballistic missile rocket
plume, as quoted by DOD officials, but rather its intensity relative to the
detection and discrimination capabilities of space-based sensors. As shown
in Figures 12 and 13, gliders will emit above the detection thresholds of
both the SBIRS and DSP systems for much of their flight.
DOD statements comparing glider IR intensity with that of a rocket
plume, rather than with the detection limits of existing space-based sensors,
constitute another example of heterogeneous engineering. In promoting a
misleading narrative regarding the adequacy of current detection systems
for hypersonic early warning, they justify not only U.S. hypersonic weapon
development but also plans for deployment of a vast new satellite
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 157
=== page 24 ===
network.96 Claims regarding the purported undetectability of hypersonic
weapons have subsequently been repeated in the news media, where they
are presented as technical facts. 97
Conclusions
Computational modeling of hypersonic boost-glide missiles reveals that the
capabilities of these weapons are limited by fundamental physical con-
straints. The drag forces they encounter during low altitude glide rapidly
reduce their velocity. Because hypersonic flight is characterized by tradeoffs
between speed, altitude, maneuverability, etc., this deceleration severely
restricts overall missile performance. Low altitude flight also produces
immense heating of glider surfaces, yielding IR signatures sufficient for
detection by existing space-based sensors.
These results call into question many of the purported advantages of
hypersonic weapons over existing missile technologies. For instance, model-
ing shows that an ICBM flying a depressed trajectory could reach intercon-
tinental targets faster than a hypersonic glider launched on the same rocket
booster, with similar vulnerability to detection by space-based early warn-
ing systems. Similarly, ballistic missiles exhibit higher terminal phase veloc-
ities than hypersonic gliders. A ballistic missile equipped with a MaRV
might therefore exhibit terminal phase maneuverability superior to that of
a hypersonic weapon, allowing it to better evade defensive interceptors or
strike mobile targets.
That said, hypersonic weapons possess some attributes or combinations
of attributes distinct from those of existing missile technologies. Their man-
euverability in the glide phase allows them to fly trajectories unachievable
by ballistic missiles at speeds unachievable by typical cruise missiles. This
would allow them to, for example, fly under the reach of missile defense
systems designed to intercept reentry vehicles above the atmosphere. But,
considering these modest distinctions between the capabilities of hypersonic
missiles and ballistic missiles, the former would be best characterized as an
evolutionary— not revolutionary — development relative to existing mis-
sile technology.
The apparent mismatch between widespread perceptions of hypersonic
weapons and their actual technical capabilities can be attributed to the
dominant role that proponents of these weapon systems have played in the
social construction of technical facts regarding their performance. Several
erroneous beliefs about hypersonic weapons — their supposed attenuation of
delivery times or invulnerability to detection by existing early warning sys-
tems— can be traced to statements by DOD officials tailored to imply
158 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 25 ===
revolutionary capabilities and, in doing so, to justify the expenditure neces-
sary for development and deployment of these systems.
Our findings clarify the probable performance of hypersonic missiles,
while also demonstrating a need for further technical assessment. Beyond
the issues explored here, there remain several unresolved questions that fol-
low-on research might address. For example, this analysis reveals the sensi-
tivity of hypersonic missile performance to glider aerodynamic parameters,
particularly L/D, which determines the magnitude of the drag a glider expe-
riences. As Acton notes, the L/D of the HTV-2, the glider on which much
of this analysis is based, is relatively low. 98 If a higher L/D were achieved
in future missile designs, glider performance (speed, range, etc.) would be
enhanced. Yet competing factors, such as the thermal resilience of materials
used in a glider ’s leading edges, may preclude substantially higher L/D val-
ues.99 Assessment of the precise determinants of achievable L/D values, as
well as other limitations on glider performance related to the thermal resili-
ence of existing aeroshell materials, would provide an improved under-
standing of hypersonic weapon capabilities. 100
Additional analysis of the vulnerability of hypersonic weapons to missile
defenses would also be useful. Boost-glide systems could be vulnerable to
boost-phase missile defenses early in flight, should those defenses be devel-
oped. During their glide and terminal phases hypersonic weapons would fly
at altitudes too low for interception by defenses designed to intercept ballis-
tic missiles above the atmosphere, such as the U.S. Ground-based Missile
Defense (GMD) and ship-based Aegis systems. 101 Endoatmospheric
defenses such as the U.S. Patriot and THAAD systems operate within the
atmosphere, but are designed to intercept warheads from missiles with
shorter ranges and slower speeds than ICBMs. 102 These systems might be
capable of engaging hypersonic vehicles during the glide or terminal
phases, given the relatively low speeds of gliders after extended flight
(Figure 9 ). However, the maneuverability of a glider might prevent the cur-
rent generation of defenses from successfully intercepting these targets.
Future versions of these defenses might be more effective against maneu-
verable vehicles but would still be capable of defending only relatively small
areas. The potential for hypersonic missiles to bypass missile defenses likely
motivates Russian and Chinese development of hypersonic weapons as a
hedge against U.S. missile defense systems, just as those countries are likely
developing decoys and other countermeasures against U.S. exoatmospheric
defenses.103
Finally, there remain several questions regarding hypersonic weapon
guidance and communications. The formation of a high temperature
plasma in the air surrounding a glider might hinder radio communications
with external guidance references, like GPS satellites. 104 That said, the
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 159
=== page 26 ===
results reported here suggest that hypersonic gliders would be traveling
slowly enough to preclude plasma formation during the terminal phase
when guidance and communication are likely to be most important.
The modeling approach outlined here provides a basis for quantitatively
addressing these, and other, unresolved questions regarding the perform-
ance of hypersonic weaponry.
Notes
1. The term “hypersonic” commonly refers to velocities greater than roughly five times
the speed of sound (Mach number >5). Unique gas flow phenomena distinguish
flight in this velocity regime. See John D. Anderson, Hypersonic and High-
Temperature Gas Dynamics , 2nd ed. (Reston, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, 2006), 13 –23. https://doi.org/10.2514/4.861956.
2. See, for example, Michael T. Klare, “An ‘Arms Race in Speed ’: Hypersonic Weapons
and the Changing Calculus of Battle, ” Arms Control Today 49 (2019): 6 –13. https://
armscontrol.org/act/2019-06/features/arms-race-speed-hypersonic-weapons-changing-
calculus-battle
3. U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer, Defense Budget Overview: Irreversible
Implementation of the National Defense Strategy (2020), 1 –8, 10 –17. https://
comptroller.defense.gov/Portals/45/Documents/defbudget/fy2021/fy2021_Budget_
Request_Overview_Book.pdf
4. On the reported pace of Chinese hypersonic testing see John A. Tirpak, “Griffin Says
Hypersonics, Acquisition Reform are Top Priorities, ” Air Force Magazine , 6 March,
2018, https://airforcemag.com/griffin-says-hypersonics-acquisition-reform-are-top-
priorities/. This includes at least nine tests of the DF-ZF hypersonic glide vehicle and
one of the XingKong-2 hypersonic cruise missile, as per Kelley Sayler, Hypersonic
Weapons: Background and Issues for Congress (Washington, DC: Congressional
Research Service, 2020), 14, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45811.
This development activity has been accompanied by a recent proliferation of
scholarly publication on hypersonic technologies by Chinese researchers. See Keith
Button, “Hypersonic Weapons Race, ” Aerospace America , June 2018. https://
aerospaceamerica.aiaa.org/features/hypersonic-weapons-race/.
5. On Russia ’s fielding of the Avangard hypersonic boost-glide missile see Julian E.
Barnes and David E. Sanger, “Russia Deploys Hypersonic Weapon, Potentially
Renewing Arms Race, ” The New York Times , 27 December 2019. https://nytimes.
com/2019/12/27/us/politics/russia-hypersonic-weapon.html. President Putin devoted
a significant portion of his 2018 Address to the Russian Federal Assembly to
hypersonic weapons, referring to Russia ’s acquisition of these missiles as “most
important stage in the development of modern weapons systems. ” See Vladimir
Putin, “Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly, ” 1 March, 2018, http://en.
kremlin.ru/events/president/news/56957. Russian hypersonic missiles tested to date
include the Avangard, the Kinzhal air-launched glide vehicle, and the Tsirkon
hypersonic cruise missile. See John T. Watts, Christian Trotti, and Mark J. Massa,
“Primer on Hypersonic Weapons in the Indo-Pacific Region ” (Washington, DC:
Atlantic Council, 2020). https://atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/
Hypersonics-Weapons-Primer-Report.pdf
160 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 27 ===
6. Steven Simon, “Hypersonic Missiles Are a Game Changer, ” The New York Times ,2
January 2020, https://nytimes.com/2020/01/02/opinion/hypersonic-missiles.html.
7. Rupal N. Mehta, “Extended Deterrence and Assurance in an Emerging Technology
Environment,” Journal of Strategic Studies (2019): 17, https://doi.org/10.1080/
01402390.2019.1621173; Michael C. Horwitz, “When speed kills: Lethal autonomous
weapon systems, deterrence and stability, ” Journal of Strategic Studies 42 (2019): 782,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2019.1621174. On claims of hypersonic weapons ’
“higher speed ” than ballistic missiles, see also Eleni Ekmektsioglou, “Hypersonic
Weapons and Escalation Control in East Asia, ” Strategic Studies Quarterly 9 (2015):
59, https://jstor.org/stable/26271074.
8. U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Robert Ashley, “Statement for the Record:
Worldwide Threat Assessment, ” testimony before the U.S. Senate Committee on
Armed Services, 6 March 2018; https://armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
Ashley_03-06-18.pdf.
9. R. Jeffrey Smith, “Hypersonic Missiles are Unstoppable. And They ’re Starting a New
Global Arms Race, ” The New York Times , 19 June, 2019, https://nytimes.com/2019/
06/19/magazine/hypersonic-missiles.html.
10. U.S. National Academies, A Threat to America ’s Global Vigilance, Reach, and Power:
High-Speed, Maneuvering Weapons: Unclassified Summary (Washington, DC:
National Academies Press, 2016), 5, https://doi.org/10.17226/23667; Seyom Brown,
“The New Nuclear MADness, ” Survival 61 (2020): 81, https://doi.org/10.1080/
00396338.2020.1715067. On the supposed impossibility of reaction to a hypersonic
strike see also Smith, “Hypersonic Missiles Are Unstoppable. ”
11. See James M. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons, ” Science & Global Security
23 (2015): 191 –219, http://scienceandglobalsecurity.org/archive/sgs23acton.pdf; Ivan
Oelrich, “Cool Your Jets: Some Perspective on to Hyping of Hypersonic Weapons, ”
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 76 (2020): 37 –45, https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.
2019.1701283; Nathan B. Terry and Paige Price Cone, “Hypersonic Technology: An
Evolution in Nuclear Weapons? ” Strategic Studies Quarterly 14 (2020): 74 –99,
https://jstor.org/stable/26915278.
12. Richard H. Speier, George Nacouzi, Carrie A. Lee, and Richard M. Moore,
Hypersonic Missile Nonproliferation: Hindering the Spread of a New Class of Weapons
(Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2017), 8 –15, https://rand.org/pubs/
research_reports/RR2137.html.
13. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons, ” 194–198. If launched on a highly
depressed trajectory, a glider might remain within the atmosphere for the entirety of
flight, obviating the need for atmospheric reentry.
14. Frank J. Regan, Re-entry Vehicle Dynamics (New York: American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1984), 287.
15. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons, ” 198–202.
16. Steven H. Walker, Jeffrey Sherk, Dale Shell, Ronald Schena, John F. Bergmann, and
Jonathan Gladbach, “The DARPA/AF Falcon Program: The Hypersonic Technology
Vehicle #2 (HTV-2) Flight Demonstration Phase, ” 15th AIAA International Space
Planes and Hypersonic Systems and Technologies Conference (2008), https://doi.org/
10.2514/6.2008-2539.
17. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons. ” David Wright, “Research Note to
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons by James M. Acton: Analysis of the Boost Phase
of the HTV-2 Hypersonic Glider Tests, ” Science & Global Security 23 (2015):
220–229, http://scienceandglobalsecurity.org/archive/sgs23wright.pdf; Jiatong Shi,
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 161
=== page 28 ===
Liang Zhang, Baosen Jiang, and Bangcheng Ai, “Aerodynamic Force and Heating
Optimization of HTV-2 Typed Vehicle, ” 21st AIAA International Space Planes and
Hypersonics Technologies Conference, 6 –9 March 2017, https://doi.org/10.2514/6.
2017-2374; Xiamen, China; Niu Qinglin, Yang Xiao, Chen Biao, He Zhihong, Liu
Lianwei, and Dong Shikui, “Infrared Radiation Characteristics and Detectability
Analysis of Point Source based on High-Speed Sliding, ” Infrared and Laser
Engineering 47 (2018): 1104001, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cja.2019.01.003; Yang Xiao,
Niu Qinglin, He Zhihong, and Dong Shikui, “Analysis of Infrared Radiation
Characteristics and Detectability of HTV-2-like Hypersonic Gliding Aircrafts, ” Acta
Optica Sinica 37 (2017): 1204001, http://clp.ac.cn/EN/Article/OJec320a62aa572dcd;
Qinglin Niu, Sen Yang, Zhihong He, and Shikui Dong, “Numerical Study of Infrared
Radiation Characteristics of a Boost-Gliding Aircraft with Reaction Control Systems,
” Infrared Physics & Technology 92 (2018): 417 –428, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
infrared.2018.06.033; Qinglin Niu, Zhichao Yuan, Biao Chen, and Shikui Dong,
“Infrared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle Under Time-Varying
Angles of Attack, ” Chinese Journal of Aeronautics 32 (2019): 861 –874, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cja.2019.01.003. This intercontinental-range, wedge shaped glider is
distinct from the shorter-range, conical systems that the United States has recently
emphasized in its hypersonic development programs (e.g., the U.S. Army ’s Long-
Range Hypersonic Weapon and the U.S. Navy ’s Intermediate Range Conventional
Prompt Strike weapon). However, less information is available regarding these
shorter-range systems.
18. Niu et al., “Infrared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle Under Time-
Varying Angles of Attack, ” 867.
19. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons, ” 205; Wright, “Research Note to
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons by James M. Acton, ” 225.
20. See, for example, E.H. Hirschel and C. Weiland, “Design of Hypersonic Flight
Vehicles: Some Lessons from the Past and Future Challenges, ” CEAS Space Journal 1
(2011): 10 –14, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12567-010-0004-4.
21. Ping Lu, Stephen Forbes, and Morgan Baldwin, “Gliding Guidance of High L/D
Hypersonic Vehicles, ” AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control (GNC) Conference,
19–22 August 2013, Boston, MA, USA, https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2013-4648; Luhua
Liu, Jianwen Zhu, Guojian Tang, and Weimin Bao, “Diving Guidance via Feedback
Linearization and Sliding Mode Control, ” Aerospace Science and Technology 41
(2015): 16 –23, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2014.11.014; JianHua Wang, LuHua Liu,
and GuoJian Tang, “Guidance and Control System Design for Hypersonic Vehicles
in Dive Phase, ” Aerospace Science and Technology 53 (2016): 47 –60, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ast.2016.03.010; Shili Tan, Humin Lei, and Tao Liu, “Optimal Maneuver
Trajectory for Hypersonic Missiles in Dive Phase Using Inverted Flight, ” IEEE Access
7 (2019): 63493 –63503, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2916464.
22. Shili Tan et al., “Optimal Maneuver Trajectory for Hypersonic Missiles in Dive
Phase Using Inverted Flight. ”
23. Graham Warwick, “DARPA’s HTV-2 Didn ’t Phone Home, ” Aviation Week Network ,
24 April 2010; https://web.archive.org/web/20111117084740/http://www.aviationweek.
com/aw/blogs/defense/index.jsp?plckController=Blog&plckBlogPage=BlogViewPost&
newspaperUserId=27ec4a53-dcc8-42d0-bd3a-01329aef79a7&plckPostId=Blog%
3a27ec4a53-dcc8-42d0-bd3a-01329aef79a7Post%3a70769585-4348-4701-889a-
f02c58f38314&plckScript=blogScript&plckElementId=blogDest; Ian Sample, “Falcon
HTV-2 is Lost During Bid to Become Fastest Ever Plane, ” The Guardian , 11 August
162 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 29 ===
2011, https://theguardian.com/world/2011/aug/11/fastest-ever-plane-lost-during-
test-flight.
24. Michael E. Tauber, Gene P. Menees, and Henry G. Adelman “Aerothermodynamics
of Transatmospheric Vehicles, ” Journal of Aircraft 24 (1987): 594 –602, https://doi.
org/10.2514/3.45483; See also Anderson, Hypersonic and High Temperature Gas
Dynamics, 349 –350.
25. John J. Martin, Atmospheric Reentry (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966),
16, 114.
26. Niu et al., “Infrared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle under Time-
Varying Angles of Attack. ”
27. Anderson, Hypersonic and High Temperature Gas Dynamics , 780 –781; Prior work
shows that hypersonic missiles rapidly approach thermal equilibrium under typical
flight conditions, indicating that the radiative-adiabatic limit is a reasonable
assumption. See S.A. van Binsbergen, B. van Zelderen, R.G. Veraar, F. Bouquet, and
W.H.C. Halswijk, H.M.A. Schleijpen, “Hyperheat: a Thermal Signature Model for
Super- and Hypersonic Missiles, ” Proceedings of the SPIE 10432, Target and
Background Signatures III (2017): 1043209, https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2276943.
28. Josef Stefan, “€Uber die Beziehung zwischen der W €armestrahlung und der
Temperatur,” Sitzungsberichte der Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftlichen Classe der
Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften 79 (1879): 391 –428; Ludwig Boltzmann,
“Ableitung des Stefan ’schen Gesetzes, betreffend die Abh €angigkeit der
W€armestrahlung von der Temperatur aus der electromagnetischen Lichttheorie, ”
Annalen der Physik und Chemie 258 (1884): 291 –294.
29. Niu et al., “Infrared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle Under Time-
Varying Angles of Attack, ” 868.
30. Referring to this intense thermal radiation, Russian President Putin described the
Avangard hypersonic glide vehicle as a “ball of fire. ” See Vladimir Putin,
“Presidential Address to the Federal Assembly, ” 1 March, 2018.
31. The hot gases surrounding a glider also contribute to its IR signature, but likely to a
lesser extent than thermal radiation from the vehicle itself. See William W. Kellogg
and Sidney Passman, Infrared Techniques Applied to the Detection and Interception of
Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1955),
11–12, https://rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM1572.html. Emission from this
gas is neglected in the present model, yielding conservative estimates of IR emission.
32. Max Planck, “€Uber eine Verbesserung der Wien ’schen Spectralgleichung, ”
Verhandlungen der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft 2 (1900): 202 –204; Max
Planck, “Zur Theorie des Gesetzes der Energieverteilung im Normalspectrum, ”
Verhandlungen der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft 2 (1900) 237 –245.
33. Xiao et al., “Analysis of Infrared Radiation Characteristics and Detectability of HTV-
2-like Hypersonic Gliding Aircrafts, ” 9.
34. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons, ” 206; See also the approximate
calculation of similar initial glide velocities in U.S. National Research Council, U.S.
Conventional Prompt Global Strike: Issues for 2008 and Beyond (Washington, DC:
National Academies Press, 2008), 206 –215, https://doi.org/10.17226/12061.
35. The value of lift and of L/D can be varied somewhat by changing the angle of attack
of the glider, which is the angle between the body axis and the vehicle ’s velocity.
36. On the long-standing concept of a constrained “corridor of continuous flight ” for
hypersonic vehicles, see E.P. Williams and Carl Gazley, Aerodynamics for Space
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 163
=== page 30 ===
Flight (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1956), 14 –26, https://rand.org/pubs/
papers/P1256.html.
37. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons, ” 209.
38. Alternatively, a glider could compensate for redirection of the lift force by generating
additional lift while turning. This would increase the drag it experienced in
proportion to its L/D, again reducing velocity and flight altitude. On the drag or
altitude penalty that accompanies glide phase maneuvering, see Oelrich, “Cool Your
Jets,” 38.
39. The United States, Russia, and China, the three states most ardently pursuing
hypersonic weapons, have developed and stockpiled numerous ballistic missile
systems. See Arms Control Association, “Worldwide Ballistic Missile Inventories, ”
(2017), https://armscontrol.org/factsheets/missiles.
40. For details on ballistic missile trajectory modelling, see Appendix.
41. Amy Woolf, “Conventional Prompt Global Strike and Long-Range Ballistic Missiles:
Background and Issues ” (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, 2020),
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R41464.
42. Wright, “Research Note to Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons by James M.
Acton,” 223.
43. Ibid., 225 –227.
44. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons, ” 206.
45. On the trajectories possible for a ballistic missile strike see, for example, Lisbeth
Gronlund and David Wright, “Depressed-Trajectory SLBMs: A Technical Assessment
and Arms Control Possibilities, ” Science and Global Security 3 (1992): 103 –110,
http://scienceandglobalsecurity.org/archive/sgs03gronlund.pdf.
46. Wright, “Research Note to Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons by James M. Acton. ”
47. Hypersonic gliders and ballistic missile reentry vehicles with equal velocities and
masses would possess equal kinetic energies at booster burn-out. This kinetic energy
alone might be relied upon to inflict damage on a target. If, instead, both vehicles
carried identical explosive warheads, the reentry vehicle would likely be significantly
lighter than the glider, allowing it to achieve a higher speed at the end of its boost
phase in a depressed trajectory and reducing its relative flight time to a given range.
For example, a reentry vehicle carrying a single, modern nuclear warhead could have
a mass of 500 kg or less; our calculations show that using this same booster, a
ballistic missile flying a depressed trajectory and carrying a payload of 500 kg would
have a flight time of about 21 minutes to 8,500 km, which is significantly faster than
the hypersonic weapon ( Figure 8 ). Therefore, our modelling yields conservative
estimates of ballistic missile flight speeds and delivery times relative to those of
hypersonic weapons.
48. Matthew Bunn, “Technology of Ballistic Missile Reentry Vehicles, ” in Review of U.S.
Military Research and Development: 1984 , eds. Kosta Tsipis and Penny Janeway
(Mclean, VA: Pergamon, 1984), 87 –107.
49. Michael D. Griffin and James R. French, Space Vehicle Design , 2nd ed. (Reston, VA:
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2004), 315, https://doi.org/10.
2514/4.862403.
50. A ballistic coefficient of b ¼ 12,200 kg/m2 is assumed for the ICBM reentry vehicle.
This agrees with approximate figures quoted for modern ICBMs. See Bunn,
“Technology of Ballistic Missile Reentry Vehicles, ” 71.
51. James M. Acton, Silver Bullet? Asking the Right Questions About Conventional
Prompt Global Strike (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International
164 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 31 ===
Peace, 2013), 157, https://carnegieendowment.org/files/cpgs.pdf. Over-the-horizon
radar systems, which take advantage of refraction or diffraction effects to probe
beyond their line of sight, are an exception.
52. See, for example, John W. Marini, On the Decrease of the Radar Cross Section of the
Apollo Command Module due to Reentry Plasma Effects (Greenbelt, MD: National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1967), https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/
19670020821.
53. See Pavel Podvig, “History and the Current Status of the Russian Early-Warning
System,”“ Science and Global Security ” 10 (2002): 21 –60, http://
scienceandglobalsecurity.org/archive/sgs10podvig.pdf; Jeffrey T. Richelson, “America’s
Space Sentinels: The History of the DSP and SBIRS Satellite Systems ” (Lawrence, KS:
University Press of Kansas, 2018), https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv7h0trq.
54. U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Secretary of Defense, Military and Security
Developments Involving the People ’s Republic of China (2020), 89, https://media.
defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-dod-china-military-power-report-
final.pdf; Dmitry Stefanovich, “Russia to Help China Develop an Early Warning
System,” The Diplomat , 25 October 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2019/10/russia-to-
help-china-develop-an-early-warning-system/.
55. Niu et al., “Infrared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle Under Time-
Varying Angles of Attack, ” 870.
56. Our modelling predicts stagnation point temperatures higher than those reported in
Niu et al., “Infrared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle Under Time-
Varying Angles of Attack. ” They calculate a stagnation point temperature of /C24 2200
K, compared with /C24 3300 K calculated here. However, since the stagnation point
constitutes only a small portion of the glider surface area, this difference has little
effect on the total vehicle IR light emission.
57. While we use the results of these heating calculations to estimate infrared emission
from hypersonic gliders, they also constitute a basis for calculating heating of the
interior of a glider, and of the necessary thermal protection. For analysis of these
aspects of hypersonic missile performance see David Wright, “Heat Conduction into
a Hypersonic Glide Vehicle, ” 2020, https://lnsp.mit.edu/s/Wright-Heat-conduction-
into-a-hypersonic-glide-vehicle_11-12-20.pdf.
58. Wilton Park, Missile Defence, Deterrence and Arms Control: Contradictory Aims or
Compatible Goals? (Geneva: United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research,
2002), 6, https://unidir.org/publication/missile-defence-deterrence-and-arms-control-
contradictory-aims-or-compatible-goals.
59. Niu et al., “Infrared Radiation Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle Under Time-
Varying Angles of Attack, ” 870.
60. Richelson, “America’s Space Sentinels ”.
61. Geoffrey Forden, Pavel Podvig, and Theodore A. Postol, “False Alarm, Nuclear
Danger,” IEEE Spectrum 37 (2000): 38, https://doi.org/10.1109/6.825657. Early DSP
satellite used 2000 pixel arrays. See Ellis E. Lapin, “Surveillance by Satellite, ” Journal
of Defense Research 8 (1976): 173, https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB235/
13.pdf.
62. Ibid., 176.
63. Ibid., 171.
64. Richelson, America’s Space Sentinels , 157 –176. The performance of DSP in this
tactical mission, far beyond the system ’s design parameters, was touted as “an
outstanding success. ” See United States Space Command, Operations Desert Shield
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 165
=== page 32 ===
and Desert Storm Assessment (1992), 20, https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/
NSAEBB39/document10.pdf.
65. Richard L. Garwin and Theodore A. Postol, “Airborne Patrol to Destroy DPRK
ICBMs in Powered Flight ” (2017): 26 –40, https://fas.org/rlg/airborne.pdf.
66. As previously discussed, these figures correspond to observation of the glider from
directly overhead. Observation from alternate viewing angles (as determined by the
positions of satellites in a sensor constellation relative to the glider trajectory) would
increase or decrease the observed intensity in proportion to the corresponding
change in the observed area of the vehicle. For a quantitative analysis of observed
intensity as a function of viewing angle see Niu et al., “Infrared Radiation
Characteristics of a Hypersonic Vehicle Under Time-Varying Angles of Attack, ” 870.
The DSP constellation consists of satellites in geosynchronous Earth orbit, providing
near-overhead viewing angles for objects flying near Earth ’s equator and less ideal
viewing angles for objects flying near Earth ’s poles. For these sensors, the observed
IR signature of a glider flying near one of the poles might be reduced by up to
approximately 50% relative to those shown in Figure 12 , such that tracking by DSP
sensors might be temporarily hindered until the glider returned to lower latitudes.
67. The DSP tracks ballistic missiles through a process of “discrimination between noise
and ‘real’ signals; of search for further subsequent (in time) real signals in the
geographical vicinity of that signal initiating the process; of assembly of collections
of observations into tentative tracks; of testing of these tracks against analytical and
pragmatic criteria; and upon establishment of validity, of determination of the
launch coordinates, direction, time, and type of missile. ” See Lapin, “Surveillance by
Satellite,” 179.
68. David K. Barton et al., “Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on
Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense: Scientific And Technical
Issues,” Reviews of Modern Physics 76 (2004): s159 –s170, https://doi.org/10.1103/
RevModPhys.76.S1.
69. Ibid., s167.
70. See, for example, “Report of the Space-Based IR Sensors/Technical Support Group, ”
(October 1993), 13 –15, https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB235/37.pdf.
Here, a 4 km 2 pixel footprint and a collection time of a few ms were quoted.
71. Barton et al., “Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase
Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense, ” s168. Atmospheric attenuation has a
minor effect on IR transmission to satellites from typical hypersonic flight altitudes,
which are significantly higher than the altitudes at which clouds form.
72. The SBIRS constellation consists of satellites in both geosynchronous Earth orbit
(providing near-overhead viewing angles of objects near the equator) and highly
elliptical orbits (providing near-overhead viewing angles of objects at high latitudes).
Thus, the observed IR signature data shown in Figure 13 will be only weakly
sensitive to glider position on Earth; significant attenuation of this signal due to
suboptimal viewing angles is unlikely.
73. Acton, Silver Bullet? , 157.
74. The ability of hypersonic gliders to avoid some types of missile defenses may also
provide a motivation for Russia and China to acquire these systems in response to
U.S. development of missile defenses. This is a concern for U.S. planners, but is not
a motivation for the United States to develop long-range boost-glide vehicles, since it
has already developed maneuvering warheads for use with its ballistic missiles and
its adversaries are not developing advanced defenses against long-range missiles. U.S.
166 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 33 ===
development of shorter-range hypersonic systems may be motivated by the
possibility of bypassing theater-scale defenses. We discuss the missile defense issue in
more detail in the final section of this article.
75. This analysis draws from a large literature on the sociology of technology. For an
overview, see Wiebe E. Bijker, Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor Pinch, eds., The Social
Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and History of
Technology, anniv. ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012).
76. Kelley Sayler, Hypersonic Weapons: Background and Issues for Congress (Washington,
DC: Congressional Research Service, 2020), 4 –5.
77. See, for example, John Borrie, Amy Dowler, and Pavel Podvig, Hypersonic Weapons:
A Challenge and Opportunity for Strategic Arms Control (New York: United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, 2019), 15, https://un.org/disarmament/wp-content/
uploads/2019/02/hypersonic-weapons-study.pdf; Acton, Silver Bullet? ,9 –29.
78. Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile
Crisis, 2nd ed. (New York: Addison-Wesley, 1999), 169. U.S. officials commonly cite
Chinese and Russian development of hypersonic weapons as a primary rationale for
U.S. acquisition of these missiles. See, for example, statements by then Undersecretary of
Defense for Research and Engineering Michael Griffin and then DARPA director Steven
Walker, as quoted in Ben Brimelow, “Pentagon Warns that the US is Falling Behind to
China in Hypersonic Missile Race, ” Business Insider , 20 April 2018, https://
businessinsider.com/us-falling-behind-to-china-hypersonic-missile-race-2018-4;P a t r i c k
Tucker, “The US is Accelerating Development of its own ‘Invincible’ Hypersonic
Weapons,” Defense One , 2 March 2018, https://defenseone.com/technology/2018/03/
united-states-accelerating-development-its-own-invincible-hypersonic-weapons/146355/.
79. Similar organizational dynamics have been identified in prior DOD missile
development efforts. See, for example, Spinardi ’s analysis of the fleet ballistic missile
program, wherein missile development ostensibly motivated by a need to counter
Soviet missile defenses yielded systems that were “premature, excessive, or
completely inappropriate. ” Graham Spinardi, From Polaris to Trident: The
Development of US Fleet Ballistic Missile Technology (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1994) 66 –74, 175, https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511559136.
80. Donald MacKenzie, “Inventing Accuracy: A Historical Sociology of Nuclear Missile
Guidance” (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990); Spinardi, From Polaris to Trident .
81. MacKenzie, Inventing Accuracy , 28.
82. Spinardi, From Polaris to Trident , 192.
83. See ibid., 15 –18, 173, 190 –193. The concept of heterogeneous engineering was first
developed in John Law, “Technology and Heterogeneous Engineering: The Case of
Portuguese Expansion, ” in The Social Construction of Technological Systems , eds.
Bijker, Hughes, and Pinch, 111 –134. See also Hughes ’s related concept of “system
builders” who simultaneously manipulate technical, social, political, and financial
systems to guide technological change; Thomas Parker Hughes, Networks of Power:
Electrification in Western Society, 1880 – 1930 (Baltimore: John Hopkins University
Press, 1983).
84. MacKenzie, Inventing Accuracy , 93. On the social construction of technical facts see
also Trevor J. Pinch and Wiebe E. Bijker, “The Social Construction of Facts and
Artefacts: or How the Sociology of Science and the Sociology of Technology might
Benefit Each Other, ” Social Studies of Science 14 (1984): 399 –441, https://doi.org/10.
1177%2F030631284014003004.
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 167
=== page 34 ===
85. In accordance with the sociological literature, we use the term “fact” to refer to
knowledge-claims that have acquired widespread acceptance as accurate
representations of hypersonic missile performance, regardless of their veracity. See,
for example, ibid.
86. Spinardi, From Polaris to Trident , 17.
87. Ivan Oelrich, “Hypersonic Missiles: Three Questions Every Reader Should Ask, ”
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , 17 December 2019, https://thebulletin.org/2019/12/
hypersonic-missiles-three-questions-every-reader-should-ask/.
88. Spinardi, From Polaris to Trident , 194.
89. U.S. Senate, Committee on Armed Services, “Hearing to Receive Testimony on United
States Strategic Command and United States Northern Command in Review of the
Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2020 and the Future Years Defense
Program” (Washington, DC: Alderson Court Reporting, 2019), 36, https://armed-
services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/19-14_02-26-19.pdf.
90. See Pavel Podvig, “Reducing the Risk of an Accidental Launch, ” Science and Global
Security 14 (2006): 84, http://scienceandglobalsecurity.org/archive/sgs14podvig.pdf.
91. See, for example, Mark B. Schneider, “Russian Hypersonic Missiles Have 1 Goal
(And They Might Be Unstoppable), ” The National Interest , 11 September 2019,
https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/russian-hypersonic-missiles-have-1-goal-and-
they-might-be-unstoppable-79591; Henry Meyer and Jake Rudnitsky, “Putin’s
Hypersonic Nuclear Missile Stirs Fears of Arms Race, ” Bloomberg, December 30,
2019, https://bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-12-30/putin-s-hypersonic-nuclear-
missile-stirs-fears-of-new-arms-race.
92. Quoted in John A. Tirpak, “Griffin: America Needs to Adjust to Reality of Great
Power Competition, ” Air Force Magazine , 5 March 2020, https://airforcemag.com/
griffin-america-needs-to-adjust-to-reality-of-great-power-competition/.
93. U.S. Senate, Armed Services Committee, “Unclassified Statement of Lieutenant
General Samuel A. Greaves, USAF, Director, Missile Defense Agency, Before the Senate
Armed Service Committee Subcommittee on Strategic Forces ”, 3 April 2019, 21,
https://armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Greaves_04-03-19.pdf.
94. Barton et al., “Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase
Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense, ” s161.
95. For instance, HTV-2 tests were conducted on modified Peacekeeper ICBMs. See
Woolf, “Conventional Prompt Global Strike and Long-Range Ballistic Missiles, ” 13.
Russia’s Avangard hypersonic missile is mounted on retrofitted SS-19 ICBM rockets.
See Franz-Stefan Gady, “Russia’s Avangard Hypersonic Warhead Officially Enters
Service,” The Diplomat , 27 December 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2019/12/russias-
avangard-hypersonic-warhead-officially-enters-service/.
96. Loren Thompson, “To Defeat Hypersonic Weapons, Pentagon Aims To Build Vast
Space Sensor Layer, ” Forbes, 4 February 2020, https://forbes.com/sites/lorenthompson/
2020/02/04/space-sensor-layer-is-the-pentagons-next-tech-mega-project/.
97. See, for example, Nathan Strout, “Who Will Help Track Hypersonic Threats from
Space?” Defense News, 31 October 2019, https://www.c4isrnet.com/battlefield-tech/space/
2019/10/31/who-will-help-track-hypersonic-threats-from-space/;S m i t h , “Hypersonic
Missiles Are Unstoppable.”
98. Acton, “Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons, ” 210–211.
99. See Shi et al., “Aerodynamic Force and Heating Optimization of HTV-2
Typed Vehicle. ”
168 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
=== page 35 ===
100. On materials challenges associated with hypersonic flight, see D.M. van Wie, D.G.
Drewry Jr., D.E. King, and C.M. Hudson, “The Hypersonic Environment: Required
Operating Conditions and Design Challenges, ” Journal of Materials Science 39
(2004): 5915 –5924, https://doi.org/10.1023/B:JMSC.0000041688.68135.8b.
101. On exoatmospheric ballistic missile defense, see David Hafemeister, Nuclear
Proliferation and Terrorism in the Post-9/11 World (Cham: Springer, 2016), 121 –136,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-25367-1.
102. The exception is the nuclear-tipped short-range 53T6 “Gazelle” system deployed
around Moscow.
103. On the efficacy of countermeasures against missile defenses see Andrew M. Sessler et al.,
Countermeasures (Cambridge, MA: Union of Concerned Scientists and MIT Security
Studies Program, 2000), https://ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/2019-09/countermeasures.pdf.
104. See, for example, Eric D. Gillman, John E. Foster, and Isaiah M. Blankson, “Review
of Leading Approaches for Mitigating Hypersonic Vehicle Communications Blackout
and a Method of Ceramic Particulate Injection Via Cathode Spot Arcs for Blackout
Mitigation” (Cleveland, OH: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2010),
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20100008938. Plasma sheathing has hindered terminal
phase guidance in testing of maneuverable reentry vehicles, a technology closely
related to hypersonic missiles. See, for example, U.S. National Research Council, U.S.
Conventional Prompt Global Strike , 121.
105. Lisbeth Gronlund and David Wright, “Depressed-Trajectory SLBMs: A Technical
Assessment and Arms Control Possibilities, ” Science and Global Security 3
(1992): 101 –159.
106. David Wright, “Research Note to Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons by James
M. Acton ”.
107. Frank J. Regan, Re-entry Vehicle Dynamics (New York: American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1984), 287.
108. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, and United States Air Force, U.S. Standard Atmosphere, 1976
(Washington, DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1976), https://ntrs.
nasa.gov/citations/19770009539.
Appendix. Calculating ballistic missile trajectories
We calculate the boost and ballistic phase trajectories of hypersonic missiles and the com-
plete trajectories of ballistic missiles using a computational model that integrates the equa-
tions of motion on a round, non-rotating Earth with a realistic atmosphere, considering
thrust, drag, and gravity. 105
Since the HTV-2 glide vehicle considered in this analysis was launched on a Minotaur
IV rocket booster in flight testing, we developed a model of this booster and used it to cal-
culate both the early trajectory of the hypersonic missile and the delivery trajectories and
times of ballistic missiles delivering warheads to the same range as the hypersonic vehicle.
We used this booster model to simulate missiles on both minimum-energy trajectories
(MET) and depressed trajectories (DT) to various ranges. Details of the Minotaur model
and the trajectory used for the HTV-2 vehicle are discussed in detail elsewhere. 106
The equations of motion over a round, non-rotating Earth with a realistic atmosphere
are given below. 107
SCIENCE & GLOBAL SECURITY 169
=== page 36 ===
dv
dt ¼ T
m cosg/C0 CdA
2m qv2/C0 gsinc (1)
dc
dt ¼ vcosc
re þ h þ T
vm sing/C0 g
v cosc (2)
dW
dt ¼ vcosc
re þ h (3)
dh
dt ¼ vsinc (4)
were t is time, v(t) is the magnitude of the velocity, c(t) is the angle of the velocity with
respect to the local horizontal, h(t) is the altitude, m(t) is the mass of the missile, T(t,h) is
the booster thrust, Cd(v) is the drag coefficient of the missile, A is the missile ’s maximum
cross-sectional area, g(t) is the angle of the thrust with respect to the missile body axis,
g(h) is the gravitational acceleration, re is Earth ’s radius, W(t) is the range angle of the mis-
sile around the Earth, and q(h) is the atmospheric density. Wre is the missile ’s range meas-
ured along the surface of Earth. The geometry is shown in Figure 2 in the main text. We
integrate these equations of motion over time using the midpoint method (second-order
Runge-Kutta), modeling atmospheric density using the 1976 U.S. Standard Atmosphere. 108
Thrust of a missile stage is given by:
T ¼ g0Isp
dm
dt (5)
where g0 is the gravitational acceleration at the Earth ’s surface, and for each stage Isp is the
specific impulse and dm/dt is the mass flow rate of the propellant through the engine.
Thrust is considered constant for all stages except the first, where its change with altitude
is given by:
ThðÞ ¼ g0Isp SLðÞ dm
dt þ ANozzle p 0ðÞ /C0 pðhÞ
/C0/C1 (6)
where Isp(SL) is the sea-level specific impulse of the first stage, Anozzle is the cross-sectional
exit area of the engine nozzle of the first stage, and p(h) is the atmospheric pressure.
During reentry, the drag of a missile ’s reentry vehicle is characterized by the ballistic coeffi-
cient b ¼ m/(Cd A), where m, Cd, and A are the mass, drag coefficient, and cross-sectional
area of the warhead, respectively.
170 C. L. TRACY AND D. WRIGHT
