=== page 1 ===
Science & Global Security, 23:191–219, 2015
Copyright C© Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 0892-9882 print / 1547-7800 online
DOI: 10.1080/08929882.2015.1087242
Hypersonic Boost-Glide
Weapons
James M. Acton
Nuclear Policy Program, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Washington,
DC, USA
The United States, Russia and China are developing hypersonic boost-glide vehicles.
A simple model of their trajectory is developed by assuming that the vehicle does
not oscillate during the transition to equilibrium gliding. This model is used to ana-
lyze U .S. Department of Defense data on test ﬂights for the Hypersonic Technology
Vehicle-2. This glider’s lift-to-drag ratio—a key performance parameter—is estimated
to be 2.6. The model is also used to calculate the tactical warning time that a boost-
glide attack would afford an adversary . Other aspects of boost-glide weapons’ military
effectiveness are explored. Approximate calculations suggest that, compared to exist-
ing non-nuclear weapons, boost-glide weapons could penetrate more deeply but would
be less effective at destroying silos. The distance at which a boost-glide weapon armed
with a particle dispersion warhead could destroy a mobile missile is also calculated; it
is expected to be signiﬁcantly larger than for an explosive warhead.
INTRODUCTION
Eighty years after they were ﬁrst conceived, hypersonic boost-glide weapons
are approaching realization. The idea of using a rocket to launch a re-entry ve-
hicle (RV) capable of gliding for extended distances at hypersonic speeds (faster
than ﬁve times the speed of sound) dates to the 1930s, when it was proposed
by the Austrian aeronautical engineer Eugen S ¨anger .1 Developments in rock-
etry following World War II spurred the United States to explore the concept
in the late 1950s and early 1960s, culminating in a brief—but extremely well-
funded—project to develop the Dyna-Soar , a manned intercontinental glider .
Subsequently , in the 1970s and 1980s, the United States revived the concept
Received 19 September 2014; accepted 5 March 2015.
Address correspondence to James M. Acton, Nuclear Policy Program, Carnegie Endow-
ment for International Peace, 1779 Massachusetts Avenue, NW , Washington, DC 20036-
2103, USA. E-mail: jacton@ceip.org
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in the article can be found online at
www .tandfonline.com/gsgs.
191
=== page 2 ===
192 Acton
with research into rather less ambitious maneuvering re-entry vehicles capa-
ble of gliding for hundreds, rather than thousands, of kilometers. 2
The current American attempt to develop boost-glide weapons dates to
2003 when the administration of George W . Bush initiated a program that
became known as Conventional Prompt Global Strike (CPGS) to develop fast,
long-range, non-nuclear weapons.3 The United States has since tested two glid-
ers: the Hypersonic Technology Vehicle-2 (HTV -2) and the Advanced Hyper-
sonic Weapon (AHW).
The HTV -2, which had a planned range of 17,000 km, was tested in April
2010 and August 2011. Both tests were terminated prematurely and this pro-
gram has now been effectively canceled. Instead, current U .S. efforts are fo-
cused on the AHW . According to a 2008 study by the National Research Coun-
cil of the U .S. National Academies, the AHW would have a range of about
8,000 km and might, therefore, be more accurately described as a non-global
Conventional Prompt Global Strike weapon. 4 The AHW was tested success-
fully in November 2011. A second test, in August 2014, failed because of a
booster problem.5
Recently , it has become clear that the United States is not the only state
with an interest in boost-glide weaponry . In January 2014, Beijing tested a
boost-glide system for the ﬁrst time. 6 A second test, in August 2014 over a
planned range of 1,750 km, appears to have ended in failure following a booster
problem.7 There is some evidence that, unlike the United States, China’s goal
is the delivery of nuclear weapons—although the overall scale and scope of the
Chinese program remain extremely murky .8
Senior Russian ofﬁcials have openly indicated an interest in developing an
equivalent to Conventional Prompt Global Strike, though none has said un-
ambiguously that Russia is currently doing so. 9 Meanwhile, Pavel Podvig, a
well-respected observer of Russian strategic forces, has presented extensive
evidence that Russia is currently engaged in a program to ﬂight test a hy-
personic maneuverable re-entry vehicle. 10 This work, which has been on-going
for more than a decade, was probably initiated for the purpose of developing
a nuclear-armed re-entry vehicle capable of penetrating expanded U .S. ballis-
tic missile defenses; whether it is now being applied to the development of a
conventionally armed boost-glide system is unclear .
While no particular boost-glide weapon concept is guaranteed to make it
to deployment, the general trend is clear: there is resurgence of interest in this
technology and, consequently , a signiﬁcant probability of deployments in the
next decade or two.
To assist in understanding the implications of this trend, this article
seeks (i) to develop a simple mathematical framework for modeling boost-
glide weapons; (ii) to infer the characteristics of cutting-edge systems; and (iii)
to start exploring their military effectiveness. The ﬁrst section (Boost-Glide
Physics Redux) presents a minimal model for boost-glide weapons, that is, the
=== page 3 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 193
simplest possible mathematical model that captures their essential behavior .
This model is then used to analyze the HTV -2 ﬂight tests. The HTV -2 was stud-
ied extensively in this article, even though it has effectively been canceled, be-
cause it is the only glider about which a signiﬁcant quantity of technical data
has been disclosed. Moreover , it appears to represent the absolute cutting-edge
of research and is therefore an indicator of what kind of “high-end” capabilities
might eventually be developed. Analysis of the HTV -2 also highlights some of
the technical challenges associated with boost-glide weapons in general. The
ﬁnal sections of this article, available in an online supplement, build upon the
insights gained in the analysis of the HTV -2 to estimate how much warning
time the target state of a boost-glide attack might receive and to explore the
the ability of boost-glide weapons to destroy both hard and deeply buried tar-
gets and dispersed mobile missiles.
BOOST-GLIDE PHYSICS REDUX
Overview
A glider traveling through the atmosphere experiences a lift force, L,a n d
a drag force, D. As this drag force depletes a glider’s internal energy , which
has both a kinetic and gravitational potential component, the glider loses both
speed and altitude. The distance over which it can stay aloft depends on L/D,
that is, the glider’s lift-to-drag ratio. Typical L/D values depend on gliding
speed, v, which can be conveniently expressed in terms of the Mach number ,
M, deﬁned as the ratio of a vehicle’s speed to the speed of sound. 11
Subsonic aircraft, for which M < 1, generally have lift-to-drag ratios of be-
tween 14 and 17. 12 At typical cruising altitudes, they have enough internal
energy , a majority of which is gravitational potential energy , to glide for a few
hundred kilometers at most. By contrast, when v2 ≫ 2gh, where g is the ac-
celeration due to gravity and h is altitude, the internal energy of a glider is
dominated by its kinetic component and is much larger than for a subsonic
glider , enabling it to glide much further . As derived in Appendix A (available
in an online supplement), in this regime, which typically occurs when M /greaterorsimilar5
(depending on altitude), the range of a glider , lglide, is given by
lglide = re
2
L
D ln
( 1
1 − (vi/ve)2
)
, (1)
where vi is the glider’s initial speed, ve = √gre is the speed of a satellite in low
Earth orbit, and re is the radius of the Earth.
The effect on range of increasing a glider’s kinetic energy is, however , par-
tially offset by a reduction in its lift-to-drag ratio. Speciﬁcally , a widely used
relationship connecting the lift-to-drag ratio of an optimally designed glider ,
=== page 4 ===
194 Acton
L/Dmax, to speed is 13
L/Dmax = 4 + 12
M . (2)
This relationship is valid throughout the supersonic regime, when
1 ≤ M < 5, and the hypersonic regime, when M ≥ 5. It is empirically deter-
mined and is not a fundamental law; gliders with a lift-to-drag ratio somewhat
higher than L/Dmax have been validated in experiments and by computer mod-
eling. Nonetheless, this relationship does help scale the problem and indicates
that, at very high speeds, a glider is unlikely to have a lift-to-drag ratio much
above 4.
Because the lift-to-drag ratios of hypersonic gliders are relatively mod-
est, they must be boosted to very high initial speeds—a substantial fraction
of ve—to stay aloft for thousands of kilometers. Such extremely high speeds
create a range of complex engineering challenges. 14 The hypersonic aerody-
namic regime is inherently complex and not nearly as well understood as the
subsonic or supersonic regimes. Vast amounts of heat must be dissipated in a
way that does not damage the glider’s aeroshell. In addition, high deceleration
and plasma formation can interfere with the reception of GPS signals, which
are used by U .S. boost-glide prototypes and would almost certainly be used by
any deployed boost-glide weapon, thus complicating accurate navigation (al-
though plasma formation is much more of a problem with terminally guided
ballistic missiles than gliders). 15 Contemporary efforts to develop boost-glide
weapons appear largely focused on solving these challenges.
A standard exo-atmospheric gliding trajectory , used by the HTV -2 for ex-
ample, is shown in Figure 1. The glider is boosted by a large rocket launched
in a depressed trajectory . In ﬂight tests, the United States has used modiﬁed
retired intercontinental ballistic missiles and sea-launched ballistic missiles.
Between the end of the boost phase, at time t1, and the start of re-entry , at
time t2, the glider separates from the launch vehicle. At time t3, shortly after
re-entry , the glider executes a “pull-up” to transition into stable “equilibrium”
gliding, in which the glider maintains almost level ﬂight and which begins at
time t4.
Alternatively , it is possible to launch the glider on such a highly depressed
trajectory that it never leaves the atmosphere. This strategy appears to have
been adopted for the AHW , which the National Research Council describes as
“endoatmospheric.”16 In theory , if an endo-atmospheric booster is able to attain
horizontal ﬂight at exactly the right altitude it could inject an RV straight into
equilibrium gliding without the need for a pull-up. It does not appear , however ,
as though the AHW test ﬂight involved this kind of direct injection. 17 So, in
practice, the HTV -2 and AHW trajectories are probably quite similar after the
start of the pull-up.
=== page 5 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 195
Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the different phases of an exo-atmospheric boost-glide
weapon’s trajectory . The labels,tn, indicate the time at which each phase ends. For clarity ,
radial distances are exaggerated relative to tangential distances, making it appear as
though the booster’s trajectory is lofted, whereas it is actually depressed.
In any case, the key to modeling the exo-atmospheric trajectory correctly is
to understand how the glider avoids bouncing off the atmosphere on re-entry .
After all, because atmospheric density increases rapidly with decreasing al-
titude, the lift force experienced by an RV approaching the atmosphere at a
shallow angle can increase sufﬁciently rapidly to send it back out into space. 18
In this case, the RV skips along the atmosphere in a so-called phugoid tra-
jectory . The theory of skip gliders has been studied extensively . However , it
appears that they are not currently being pursued within the CPGS program.
It is likely that the U .S. Department of Defense has decided to focus on equilib-
rium gliding because it reduces the maximum heating rate and the maximum
mechanical stress on an RV .19
One possible way of preventing a glider from skipping off the atmosphere
during re-entry is for it to rotate in such a way that it generates minimal
lift. Indeed, a schematic diagram of the HTV -2 ﬂight plan released by DARPA
clearly shows the glider re-entering the atmosphere with its ﬂat lower sur-
face roughly perpendicular to its direction of travel, i.e., in a low-lift, high-drag
conﬁguration that would tend to prevent skipping. 20 The same diagram shows
that the HTV -2 then rotates so that its axis and velocity vector are aligned—a
low-drag, high-lift conﬁguration suitable for gliding.
If this rotation were to happen rapidly then the glider would not tran-
sition smoothly into equilibrium gliding but would follow a rapidly oscillat-
ing trajectory .21 Such oscillations would, as in the case of a skip glider , result
from the rapidly increasing density of the atmosphere inducing a lift force that
caused the glider to overshoot its equilibrium position. Although these oscil-
lations would eventually decay , it seems likely that the designers of a practi-
cal boost-glide vehicle would want them to be as highly damped as possible
=== page 6 ===
196 Acton
(after all, if they have designed the vehicle for equilibrium gliding rather than
skip gliding, then it is to avoid precisely this kind of transient behavior). In-
deed, the DARPA schematic shows the glider bouncing just once during the
pull-up. One potential way to dampen oscillations is to rotate the glider slowly
so that the lift force increases gradually .
The remainder of this section develops a minimal model of this trajectory .
In keeping with this approach, the trajectory is assumed to contain no oscilla-
tions during the pull-up. The result is a relatively simple model that is (largely)
analytically tractable and hence easy to scrutinize. Ultimately , of course, it
cannot compete for accuracy with more complex models that must be solved
numerically . However , it is hoped that, by elucidating the basic design consid-
erations of the HTV -2, this article will aid efforts by other non-governmental
researchers to develop a more complex and accurate model.
Mathematical Formalism
The trajectory of an RV of mass m can, in two-dimensions, be characterized
by its speed, v, and path angle, θ, at any point. As shown in Figure 2, θ is the
angle between an RV’s velocity vector and the local horizontal. By deﬁnition,
θ> 0 when the velocity vector is below the horizontal (i.e., the RV is travel-
ing downwards). In addition to gravity , the RV experiences two forces due to
interactions with the atmosphere: a drag force D = CDAρv2/2, which acts in
the opposite direction to its velocity , and lift force L = CLAρv2/2, which acts
perpendicular to its velocity , where CD and CL are the coefﬁcients of drag and
lift, A is the cross-sectional frontal area of the RV , and ρ is the density of the
atmosphere. CD, CL,a n d A all depend on the glider’s angle of attack, that is,
the angle between its long axis and the velocity vector .
In developing a simple mathematical model, the glider is treated as a
point-like particle (which involves assuming inter alia that its center of mass
and center of pressure are the same) with a ballistic coefﬁcient of β = m/CDA
and a lift-to-drag ratio of L/D. Both these quantities are allowed to vary along
the trajectory as the angle of attack changes. Assuming that the Earth is a
perfectly spherical, non-rotating body , the relevant equations of motion are 22
− dv
dt =− g sin θ + ρ
2β v2 (3)
v
cos θ
dθ
dt = g − v2
r − ρ
2βcos θ
L
D v2, (4)
where t is time and r is the distance of the RV from the center of the Earth. Be-
cause any changes in r are very small compared to re = 6,400 km, it is standard
practice to treat r = re and g = 9.8m s−2 as constants.
=== page 7 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 197
Figure 2: Schematic diagram illustrating the forces acting on a re-entry vehicle traveling
through the atmosphere. Note that the angle θ , between the vehicle’s velocity vector and
the local horizontal, is positive when the vehicle is traveling downwards. Other quantities are
deﬁned in the main text. (Not drawn to scale.)
The downrange distance traveled by the RV , x, and its altitude above the
Earth’s surface,h, are also of interest. The former is related to v and θ by
dx
dt = v cosθ, (5)
whereas the latter is given by
dh
dt =− v sinθ. (6)
In order to solve these equations, it is necessary to model the variation
of atmospheric density with altitude. The relationship between density and
altitude can conveniently be expressed as
ρ = ρ0 e−h/H, (7)
where ρ0 = 1.23 kg m−3 is atmospheric density at sea level and H,w h i c hi s
a function of h, is the so-called scale height of the atmosphere. In order to
make analytic progress, however , it is necessary to take H as a constant
(which is physically equivalent to assuming the atmosphere is isothermal).
For 30 km < h < 100 km, the relevant altitude range for boost-glide vehicles,
ρ0 = 1.46 kg m−3 and H = 6,970 m yield the best ﬁt with data from the 1976
U .S. standard atmosphere.23 Using this assumption, it is possible to develop
an approximate analytic solution to Eq. (3) and Eq. (4) by breaking the trajec-
tory down into a series of phases, as shown in Figure 1. The variables t, θ, v, x,
and h at the end of phase n are given by tn, θn, vn, xn,a n d hn respectively . The
phases are as follows:
=== page 8 ===
198 Acton
Phase 1: Boost phase.
The rocket is launched at t0 = 0, x0 = 0, h0 = 0, θ0 =− 90◦ and v0 = 0. Burn-
out occurs at the end of this phase.
Phase 2: Exo-atmospheric phase.
In this phase, atmospheric forces on the RV are neglected. The trajectory
in this phase is ballistic unless the RV is equipped with thrusters that it can
use to re-enter the atmosphere sooner than it would otherwise have done.
Phase 3: Direct re-entry.
When the RV reaches an altitude h2, atmospheric forces can no longer be
neglected and the RV starts to decelerate rapidly . It is assumed that, during
this phase, the RV is at a large angle of attack, i.e., its ﬂat lower surface is ex-
posed to the atmosphere, resulting in a large drag force and minimal lift. Dur-
ing this phase, the ballistic coefﬁcient is assumed to be a constant, βS (where
the subscript is meant to imply that β is “small”) and the lift-to-drag ratio is
taken as zero. Numerical simulations of this kind of “direct re-entry” indicate
that for θ2 > 5◦, it is a good approximation to treat θ as a constant. 24 If it is
further assumed that gravity can be neglected relative to drag then standard
analytic solutions exist. These solutions are summarized in Table 1 and their
derivation is presented brieﬂy in Appendix A.
Phase 4: Pull-up.
In this phase, it is assumed that the RV gradually rotates into its high-
lift, low-drag orientation, causing θ to decrease. For modeling purposes, it is
assumed that there are no oscillations during the pull-up. Approximate solu-
tions are derived in the following section and are also included in Table 1.
Phase 5. Equilibrium gliding.
Once θ ≈ 0, equilibrium gliding is established. In this phase the ballistic
coefﬁcient is denoted by βL (where the subscript is meant to suggest that β is
“large”) and the lift-to-drag ratio is L/D.B o t hL/D and βL are assumed to be
constant during gliding. At the end of this phase, when the glider is a distance
x5 downrange and close to the target, it uses its thrusters to exit the glide and
impact on the target. Under the assumptions that θ ≪ 1 rad, d θ/dt ≈ 0, and
g sinθ ≪ dv/dt, standard analytic solutions, which are summarized in Table 1
and derived in Appendix A, can be obtained.
Pull-up Phase
At time, t3, the RV starts to execute a pull-up to enable the transition from
direct re-entry , when θ = θ2, to equilibrium gliding, when θ ≃ 0. The pull-up
=== page 9 ===
Table 1: Equations describing the trajectory of a hypersonic glider during each of its three phases of endo-atmospheric ﬂight.
Quantities not deﬁned in the table have already been deﬁned in the main text.
Phase 2: Phase 3: Phase 4:
Direct re-entry Pull-up Equilibrium gliding
v and h v = v2 eδ exp
(
− Hρ0
2βS sinθ2
e−h/H
)
h3 − h = R L
D
[
θ2
( v3 − v
v3
)
− 1
2
L
D
(
1 + R
re
− gR
v2
3
) ( v3 − v
v3
)2]
h = H ln
( ρ0re
2βL
L
D
v2
v2
e − v2
)
θ and vθ = θ2 θ2 − θ = L
D
(
1 + R
re
− gR
v2
3
)
v3 − v
v3
sin θ = 2
[
re
H
L
D
( v
ve
)2]−1
t and v or h t − t2 = h2 − h
v2eδ sinθ2
+ H
v2eδ sinθ2
∞∑
n=1
δn
n· n!
(
e−n(h−h2 )/H − 1
)
v = v3
(
1 − D
L
v3 (t − t3)
R
) v
ve
=
exp
[
−2 D
L
g
ve (t − t4)
]
− /Gamma14
exp
[
−2 D
L
g
ve (t − t4)
]
+ /Gamma14
x and t or h h2 − h = (x − x2) tan θ2 x − x3 = v3
[
(t − t3) − D
L
v3 (t − t3)2
2R
]
x − x4 =− ve (t − t4) +
re
L
D ln
⎛
⎝ 1 + /Gamma14
exp
[
−2 D
L
g
ve (t − t4)
]
+ /Gamma14
⎞
⎠
Deﬁnitions δ = Hρ0
2βS sinθ2
e−h2/H R = 2βL
ρ (h4)
D
L /Gamma14 = 1 − v4/ve
1 + v4/ve
199
=== page 10 ===
200 Acton
is the phase of motion that is least susceptible to an analytic treatment and,
in contrast to the cases of equilibrium gliding and direct re-entry , relatively
little attention has been paid to it in the open literature. Nonetheless, if the
goal is to analyze empirical data, it is necessary to model the pull-up. Fortu-
nately , because the pull-up represents only a relatively small fraction of the
total trajectory and the speed change during the pull-up is relatively small,
even a fairly crude model is likely to be adequate for current purposes. (That
said, there is little question that analysis of the pull-up would beneﬁt from a
numerical treatment).
Mathematically , the oscillations that generally accompany the transition
to equilibrium gliding are induced by the third term of the right-side of Eq.
(4). Here it is assumed that, in order to dampen them, the glider is gradually
rotated during the pull-up. If this rotation, which increases the ballistic coefﬁ-
cient from βS to βL, can be timed so that the ratio ρ/β remains constant then
the decrease in drag precisely cancels out the rapid increase in density . Be-
cause the estimate for βL obtained in the next section is more reliable than the
estimate for βS, ρ/β is set to ρ (h4) /βL in constructing the mathematical model
of the pull-up. Nonetheless, the assumption that ρ/β is constant obviously im-
plies that
ρ (h3)
βS
= ρ (h4)
βL
. (8)
Even if ρ/β remains constant, oscillations may still occur because the rota-
tion also causes the glider’s lift-to-drag ratio to increase. In the absence of de-
tailed information about the design of a glider , it is not possible to determine
how this ratio varies during the pull-up. Moreover , if the lift-to-drag ratio is
not a constant, the equations of motion become analytically intractable. Con-
sequently , in keeping with the goal of obtaining a non-oscillatory trajectory ,
the lift-to-drag ratio is simply taken as the constant L/D during the pull-up.
If it is further assumed that θ ≪ 1 rad , throughout the pull-up and that the
gravitational force is small compared to drag then Eq. (3) and Eq. (4) become
dv
dt =− ρ (h4)
2βL
v2 (9)
and
vdθ
dt = g − v2
re
− ρ (h4)
2βL
L
D v2. (10)
Special case: High-speed solution
In ﬁnding approximate solutions to these equations, it is instructive, in
the ﬁrst instance, to consider the scenario where the pull-up takes place at
speeds comparable to ve. In this case, the ﬁrst two terms on the right-hand
=== page 11 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 201
side of Eq. (10) cancel out. Then dividing Eq. (9) by Eq. (10) and noting that
θ3 = θ2 (because the path angle is assumed to remain constant during the
direct re-entry phase), it is straightforward to show that
v = v3e− D
L (θ2−θ). (11)
Because the underlying equations of motion, Eq. (9) and Eq. (10), are only
valid when both θ2 and θ are small, then θ2 − θ must also be small. In this case,
Eq. (11) is equivalent to
v
v3
= 1 − D
L (θ2 − θ) . (12)
Equation (11) was derived in the National Research Council study on
CPGS by assuming that the glider’s trajectory during the pull-up is a circu-
lar arc. 25 The framework presented here allows this assumption to be simply
proved (as well as revealing that it is only valid when the pull-up takes place
at speeds close to ve). Speciﬁcally , it is now convenient to deﬁne a new length-
scale, R, such that
R = 2βL
ρ (h4)
D
L . (13)
Using this deﬁnition, Eq. (10) can be re-expressed as
dθ
dt =− v
R. (14)
Noting that d θ/dt < 0, this result shows that the pull-up at high speeds is in-
deed the arc of a circle with radius R.
The dependence of θ on t can be found by combining Eq. (12) and Eq. (14)
and again invoking the small angle approximation to yield
θ = θ2 − v3 (t− t3)
R . (15)
Within the same approximation scheme, it also follows from Eq. (9) that
v = v3
(
1 − D
L
v3 (t− t3)
R
)
. (16)
This result and Eq. (5) enable the downrange distance traveled during the
pull-up to be shown to be
x − x3 = v3
[
(t− t3) − D
L
v3 (t− t3)2
2R
]
. (17)
Finally , because the trajectory of the RV at high speeds is a circular arc, its
change in altitude is given by h3 − h = R (cos θ − cos θ2). Using the small angle
=== page 12 ===
202 Acton
approximation and Eq. (12), this expression becomes
h3 − h = R L
D
[
θ2
( v3 − v
v3
)
− 1
2
L
D
( v3 − v
v3
)2]
. (18)
General solution.
If v ⁄∼ ve during the pull-up, Eq. (12), Eq. (15) and Eq. (18) cease to be
valid, although Eq. (16) and Eq. (17) do remain valid at any speed. It is pos-
sible, however , to obtain a more general analytic solution that is valid at any
speed. Speciﬁcally , the dependence of θ on v can be found by dividing Eq. (9) by
Eq. (10) to yield a differential equation with the solution
θ2 − θ = L
D
[
gR
2
(
1
v2
3
− 1
v2
)
+
( R
re
+ 1
)
ln
(v3
v
)]
. (19)
Because this result is only valid when θ2 − θ is small, then the fractional
change in speed during the pull-up must also be small. In this case, linearizing
(19) in the small parameter (v3 − v) /v3 gives
θ2 − θ = L
D
(
1 + R
re
− gR
v2
3
)
v3 − v
v3
. (20)
A useful check on the algebra is to note that in the high speed limit, when
v ∼ ve throughout the pull-up, Eq. (6) becomes identical to Eq. (12).
The change in altitude during the pull-up can be found by substituting Eq.
(20) into Eq. (6), employing the small angle approximation, integrating and
linearizing to give
h3 − h = R L
D
[
θ2
( v3 − v
v3
)
− 1
2
L
D
(
1 + R
re
− gR
v2
3
) ( v3 − v
v3
)2]
. (21)
Once again, the fact that, in the high speed limit, this result becomes equiva-
lent to Eq. (18) provides conﬁdence in the derivation.
MODELING THE HTV-2 TEST FLIGHTS
The HTV -2 ﬂight test program provides an opportunity to apply this model.
Speciﬁcally , there is enough quantitative data to estimate certain properties of
the glider including, most importantly , its lift-to-drag ratio. Moreover , because
not all of the available data needs to be used in estimating the model’s param-
eters, its ﬁdelity can be tested by comparing its output to the remaining data
points.
When the HTV -2 test program was initiated, ﬂights along two differ-
ent trajectories, called “A” and “B”, were planned. 26 Each route started from
=== page 13 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 203
Vandenberg Air Force Base in California and the planned impact point was
7,800 km away in the Paciﬁc Ocean near Illeginni Island, which is part
of Kwajalein Atoll in the Republic of the Marshall Islands and lies ap-
proximately south-west of the launch site. The A route was a more-or-less
straight line between these locations. The B route, which was intended to
test the glider’s midcourse maneuverability , was to involve the glider ﬁrst
heading almost due west before turning to approach the target from the
north.
The ﬁrst test ﬂight, which took place on 22 April 2010 along the A route,
was terminated prematurely after the vehicle began to rotate uncontrollably .
As a result, the A route was also used for the second ﬂight test on 11 August
2011. Again, this test was terminated early after the glider’s aeroshell was
damaged by heating. 27 No more HTV -2 ﬂight tests have taken place since then
so the B route has never been attempted.
Quantitative information about the test ﬂights is available from ﬁve
sources:
• The Environmental Assessment for Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 Flight
Tests, which was prepared by the Space and Missile Systems Center and
published in 2009, gives a range of altitudes at which the HTV -2 was to
start its glide ( h4) and, more importantly , a single altitude at which it was
to leave a gliding trajectory to approach the target ( h5).28
• A presentation given by a DARPA employee at the National Institute of
Aerospace on 17 June 2009 contains a detailed map of both the A and B
trajectories on which various parameters are marked, including the total
endo-atmospheric ﬂight time ( t5 − t2), and the speed ( v2) and path angle
(θ2) of the glider at the “pierce point” (the point at which the RV re-enters
the atmosphere). 29 The map also states the transverse distance that was
to have been ﬂown during the B ﬂight. The relevant picture is reproduced
here in Figure 3.
• In April 2010, the website of Aviation Week published a second map, similar
to that shown in Figure 3, which was reportedly included in a presentation
given by a senior DARPA ofﬁcial in December 2009. 30 On this map, arrows
along the A and B trajectories indicate the time after launch at which the
RV re-enters the atmosphere ( t2) and begins to glide ( t4). The locations of
the arrows also allow the distances traveled between re-entry and the end
of the pull-up ( x4 − x2), and between re-entry and the end of the glide phase
(x5 − x2) to be estimated—although such estimates have large associated
errors because the positions of the arrows appear to be approximate.
• According to the DARPA website, “139 seconds of Mach 22 to Mach 17 aero-
dynamic data” was collected during the 2010 test. 31 This statement implies
=== page 14 ===
204 Acton
Figure 3: Map from a presentation given by a DARP A employee in June 2009 showing the
ﬂight paths for the planned HTV-2 test ﬂights, along with some data about those ﬂights. Note
that γ and −V, as used in the ﬁgure, appear to be equivalent to θ and v respectively , as
used in this article.
that at time ti = t2 + 139 s, the vehicle’s speed,vi, was 17 vs (hi), where vs (h)
is the speed of sound at altitude h,a n dhi was the vehicle’s altitude att = ti.
• Notiﬁcations to Mariners , provided ahead of each of the tests, provide co-
ordinates for the drop zones of each of the booster rocket’s stages. 32 As
described further in the companion article by David Wright (in this is-
sue), these data are consistent with atmospheric re-entry taking place at
h2 = 100 km, which is a common deﬁnition of the altitude of the pierce
point. That said, the uncertainty in h2 must be regarded as signiﬁcant.
A Flight
All the available data about the A ﬂight is summarized in Table 2. By
ﬁtting the model set out in Table 1 to this data, the lift-to-drag ratio and other
characteristics of the HTV -2 can be estimated.
The details of the ﬁtting process, which involves solving a set of ordi-
nary , non-linear , simultaneous equations, are described further in Appendix B
=== page 15 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 205
Table 2: Summary of known information about the A ﬂight test. The ﬁgures in
parentheses are subject to signiﬁcant uncertainties and are not used in ﬁtting the
model to the data.
n tn (s) θn (deg) hn (km) vn (ms−1) xn − x2 (km)
2 435 5.03 100 6,010 0
3 5.03
4 620 (45.7–76.2) (1,200)
5 1,798 30.5 5,900
additional information: v(574 s) = 17vs (h(574 s))
(available in an online supplement). Because of the number of unknowns, two
of the data in Table 2 do not need to be used in ﬁtting the model. Because only
a wide range is available for h4, this quantity is not used. Likewise, x4 − x2 is
not used since the fractional uncertainty associated with this quantity is par-
ticularly large. To enhance numerical stability , the four parameters, L/D, βS,
βL,a n d R, are treated as independent in the ﬁtting process (the implications
of this assumption are discussed further below).
Selected results of the ﬁtting process—estimates for L/D, βS, βL,a n d
R—are shown in Table 3. The ﬁtting process also yields estimates for t3, h3,
v3, hi, h4, v4, θ4,a n d v5. From these results, the equations in Table 1 can be
used to calculate the glider’s speed, altitude, path angle and downrange dis-
tance at any time. Using this procedure, the model’s predictions for the speed
and altitude of the glider as a function of downrange distance are shown in
Figure 4.
A number of the model’s predictions are consistent with information not
used in the ﬁtting process, helping to build conﬁdence in its ﬁdelity . Specif-
ically , the model’s predictions for h4 and x4 − x2, which are also shown in
Table 3, compare well to the values shown in parentheses in Table 2. In addi-
tion, the estimate of βL = 13,000 kg m−2 seems reasonable on physical grounds
as it is very similar to estimates for the ballistic coefﬁcient of modern ICBM
RVs.33
Table 3: Estimated parameters for the A test ﬂight, obtained by ﬁtting the model to
the data in Table 2.
L /D 2.6
βS 7.0k gm−2
βL 13,000 kg m−2
R 4.9 × 103 km
x4 − x2 1,100 km
h4 47 km
=== page 16 ===
206 Acton
Figure 4: Plots of calculated speed, v (top ﬁgure, in ms −1), and altitude, h (bottom ﬁgure, in
km), against downrange distance from atmospheric re-entry , x − x2 (in km, measured along
the trajectory) for the two HTV-2 test ﬂights. The circular markers indicate increments of 100
seconds after re-entry . The dashed lines show the start of the pull-up and the dotted lines
show the start of equilibrium gliding.
Another important test of the ﬁdelity of the results is to ascertain how
much they change as h2, which has a bigger uncertainty than any of the other
input parameters, is varied. Reassuringly , increasing or decreasing h2 mod-
estly does not lead to signiﬁcant changes. For example, increasing h2 from
100 km to 110 km causes L/D to increase from 2.6 to 2.7. The one exception
to this trend is βS, which increases by a factor of 3 with the same variation in
h2. Meanwhile, decreasing h2 below 97 km causes βS to change sign (which is
obviously unphysical). The uncertainty in βS is hardly surprising. The direct
re-entry phase in the A ﬂight is estimated to be very short—just 12 seconds.
As a result, changes in βS should affect the trajectory much less than changes
in, say ,βL or L/D. The estimate for βS is, therefore, signiﬁcantly less reliable
than the other values given in Table 3.
Moreover , the estimate forβS is an order-of-magnitude smaller than might
be expected on physical grounds. In the direct re-entry phase, when the HTV -2
=== page 17 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 207
is at a large angle of attack, it presents its relatively ﬂat lower surface to the
oncoming air . If this surface is modeled as a ﬂat sheet of area AS at an angle
φ to the glider’s velocity vector then, using a Newtonian approximation, the
HTV -2’s ballistic coefﬁcient can be estimated as34
βS = m
2ASsin3φ
. (22)
If the HTV -2’s lower surface is modeled as an isosceles triangle of height 5 m
and width 2 m (so the glider can comfortably enough ﬁt into the fairing of the
Minotaur IV Lite launch vehicle 35)t h e nAS = 5m 2. This value, along with the
estimate that m = 1,000 kg as discussed in the companion article by Wright,
implies that βS > 100 kg m−2, a factor of 10 or so bigger than the model’s pre-
diction. This failure is probably associated with the simpliﬁcation of assuming
that there is no oscillatory behavior during the pull-up. If the model permitted
such behavior , it seems likely that more of the glider’s speed would be lost dur-
ing the pull-up, resulting is less deceleration during the direct re-entry phase
and hence a larger value of βS.
Finally , as noted above, the ﬁtting process treats L/D, βS, βL,a n d R as
independent. In fact, according to the model, these four parameters are not
independent but should be related by Eq. (8) and Eq. (13). Seeing how closely
the results shown in Table 3 adhere to these relationships is another important
test. Speciﬁcally , using the values of L/D and βL shown in this table, Eq. (8)
predicts that βS should be 17 kg m −2, whereas Eq. (13) predicts that R should
be 5.9 × 103 km. This latter value lies within about 20% of the value shown in
Table 3, which is respectable given the crudeness of the model. The fractional
error associated with βS is larger , which is not surprising in light of the earlier
ﬁnding that the estimates of βS produced by this method are not reliable.
Overall, the available evidence suggests that the model provides a physi-
cally reasonable description of the HTV -2’s trajectory , except during early endo-
atmospheric ﬂight, with the consequence that its estimate for βS should not be
considered reliable.
B Flight
Unlike the A ﬂight, the B ﬂight was intended to involve the glider travel-
ing a signiﬁcant cross-range distance of about 2 ,300 km.36 A glider like HTV -
2 can move in a transverse direction by banking, that is, rotating about its
axis by an angle ψ. Banking in this way creates a force of magnitude L sinψ
perpendicular to the glider’s velocity and causes its trajectory to curve, as
shown in Figure 5. Simultaneously , it reduces the lift force on the glider from L
to L cosψ. In fact, within the approximation scheme in which they are valid, the
gliding equations shown in Table 1 remain unchanged when the glider banks,
except for the replacement of L with L cosψ.37
=== page 18 ===
208 Acton
Figure 5: Motion of and forces acting on a glider banking at an angle ψ to the vertical. The
main ﬁgure shows the view from above. The inset shows a cross section. Other quantities are
deﬁned in the text.
Under the assumption that Earth’s curvature in the transverse direction
can be neglected (that is, the radius of curvature of the glider’s trajectory is
much smaller than the radius of the Earth), then a new set of coordinates,
(X, Y), can be deﬁned, where the X-axis lies parallel to the glider’s velocity at
the start of the glide phase, as is also shown Figure 5. The glider’s position in
the X-Y plane at time t is then given by
X (t) =
∫ t
t4
dt′vb
(
t′)
cos
[
ω
(
t′)]
, and (23)
Y (t) =
∫ t
t4
dt′vb
(
t′)
sin
[
ω
(
t′)]
, (24)
where ω (t) is the angle between the glider’s velocity the X-axis, and the speed
of the glider while banking, vb (t), is given by
vb (t) = ve
exp
[
−2 D
Lcosψ
g
ve (t− t4)
]
− /Gamma14
exp
[
−2 D
Lcosψ
g
ve (t− t4)
]
+ /Gamma14
. (25)
As derived in Appendix A, ω (t) can be shown to be 38
ω (t) =− L
D sinψ ln
[vb (t)
v4
]
. (26)
These results can be used to analyze the B ﬂight and, most importantly , pre-
dict the cross-range distance that was to be traversed. This result can then be
compared to the ﬁgure given by DARPA.
Table 4 shows all the available data about the B ﬂight. Once again, h4 and
x4 − x2 are not used in ﬁtting the model’s parameters to this data. In modeling
this ﬂight, it is assumed that the RV does not bank during the pull-up but that,
=== page 19 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 209
Table 4: Summary of known data about the B ﬂight test. The ﬁgures in parentheses
are subject to signiﬁcant uncertainties and are not used in ﬁtting the model to the
data.
n tn (s) θn (deg) hn (km) vn (ms−1) xn − x2 (km)
2 376 3 100 7,170 0
33
4 606 (45.7–76.2) (1,900)
5 1,785 30.5 7,200
as soon as gliding starts, it rotates quickly . It is further assumed that L/D and
βL for the B ﬂight are the same as for the A ﬂight.
Using these assumptions, a procedure similar to the one employed to ﬁt
the model to the A ﬂight can then be used to extract ψ, βS,a n d R as well
as v (x) and h (x) for the B trajectory—as shown in Table 5 and Figure 4. It
should be noted that the assumption that θ is constant during direct re-entry
is questionable for the B ﬂight because θ2 < 5◦. However , given that the direct
re-entry phase represents only a relatively small part of the whole trajectory ,
the consequences of this assumption breaking down should not be too severe.
From Table 5 it can be seen that, once again, the estimated values for h4
and x4 − x2 are consistent with the available data. The values of βS obtained for
the A and B ﬂights are also essentially the same, given the signiﬁcant uncer-
tainty in both estimates. 39 The ﬁnal check, as before, is to compare the value of
R predicted by Eq. (13) to the one found by the ﬁtting process. Here the agree-
ment turns out to be even better than for the A ﬂight. Speciﬁcally , Eq. (13) pre-
dicts that R should be 7 .5 × 103 km, which is in remarkably good agreement
with the value shown in Table 5.
This ﬁtting process also estimates the banking angle, ψ,t ob e3 6◦.W i t ht h i s
information, the shape of the RV’s trajectory in the X-Y plane during the glide
phase can be evaluated numerically from Eq. (23) and Eq. (24) and is plotted in
Figure 6. As can be seen from this ﬁgure, the model predicts that, at the end of
its ﬂight at time t5, the glider should have traveled 2 ,000 km in the Y -direction.
Table 5: Estimated parameters for the B test ﬂight, obtained by ﬁtting the model to
the data in Table 4.
ψ 36◦
βS 10 kg m−2
R 8.0 × 103 km
x4 − x2 1,400 km
h4 49 km
=== page 20 ===
210 Acton
Figure 6: Plot of the calculated trajectory of the B ﬂight in the X-Y plane during the glide
phase. The cross shows the planned end of the ﬂight. The dashed line shows the
continuation of the trajectory beyond this point. The circular markers indicate increments of
100s. The X- and Y-directions are deﬁned, respectively , to be parallel and perpendicular to
the glider’s velocity at the start of the glide. Note that the X and Y axes, which are both
marked in km, are not drawn to the same scale.
Pleasingly , this estimate is within 15% of the stated value of 2 ,300 km and
provides more evidence that estimates of L/D and βL are reliable.
More qualitatively , the shape of the trajectory shown in Figure 6 is similar
to the published trajectory shown in Figure 3. The former does not, however ,
“bend back” on itself at the very end as the latter does—although the model can
produce this behavior . For example, if the trajectory of the B ﬂight is calculated
beyond the planned end time at t5, shown by the dashed line in Figure 6, then
the glider would reverse course.
DISCUSSION
The most important conclusion to be drawn from this analysis is that the HTV -
2 has an estimated lift-to-drag ratio of 2.6. This number is similar to the value
L/D = 2.2 used in the 2008 National Research Council study for sample cal-
culations involving a generic hypersonic glider . 40 It appears, therefore, that
the HTV -2 has a lift-to-drag ratio substantially below the theoretical maxi-
mum predicted by Eq. (2). The reason is probably that heat management—not
aerodynamics—is the limiting factor in determining L/D.
This conclusion may , at ﬁrst sight, be slightly unexpected. After all, intu-
itively , one might reason that heat management would become less challenging
as L/D increases. Indeed, it follows from Eq. (S.23), in online Appendix A, that
the total rate of heat production by a gliding RV is
mg v
L/D
(
1 − v2
v2e
)
, (27)
=== page 21 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 211
which is inversely proportional to L/D, thus supporting the intuitive conclu-
sion that as drag goes up, heat production also goes up.
However , for thermal protection, what matters is not the total rate of heat
production but the rate of heat absorption by the glider (as opposed to ab-
sorption by the surrounding air). A key insight into atmospheric re-entry , ﬁrst
understood in the 1950s, is that heat is absorbed more efﬁciently by an RV
with a pointed front end or sharp leading edges. 41 However , thin wings with
sharp leading edges are exactly what is needed to increase L/D. It seems likely ,
therefore, that hypersonic gliders would tend to absorb heat more efﬁciently as
their lift-to-drag ratio increases. The design of the HTV -2, with L/D ≈ 2.6, ap-
pears to represent a compromise between long ranges (which are aided by a
high L/D) and a low rate of heat absorption (which requires a low L/D).
Even so, thermal protection remained a problem for the HTV -2. The 2011
test was ended prematurely as a direct result of damage to the glider’s
aeroshell caused by heating. Thermal protection challenges may also have
contributed indirectly to the failure of the 2010 ﬂight test. Speciﬁcally , re-
ducing a glider’s lift-to-drag ratio to simplify thermal protection requires it
to be launched at a higher speed in order not to compromise range. Higher
speeds, however , exacerbate the difﬁculty of control. Indeed, a review into the
2010 ﬂight test concluded that “the most probable cause of the HTV -2 ﬂight
anomaly was higher-than-predicted yaw , which coupled into roll thus exceed-
ing the available control capability at the time of the anomaly .”42 Control would
presumably have been easier at lower speeds.
Even higher speeds than were planned for the B test would have been
needed for the HTV -2 to meet its range goal of 17 ,000 km. Glide range can be
estimated from Eq. (1). It is important to note that this result represents an
upper bound for two reasons. First, it assumes that the glider remains aloft
until its speed drops to zero. Second, it assumes that the glider travels in a
straight line; in practice, maneuvering incurs a range penalty .
The HTV -2 was due to start gliding in the B test at a speed of about
6,100 ms−1. Had it simply traveled in a straight line, Eq. (1) predicts that
it could have glided for a maximum distance of 7 ,500 km, implying a to-
tal range of 11 ,700 km. To increase the range to 17 ,000 km, it follows from
Eq. (1) that gliding would need to commence at a speed of 6 ,900 ms−1. In prac-
tice, even higher speeds would be required to accommodate cross-range maneu-
vering and to ensure that the weapon was traveling at a militarily useful speed
when it reached the target. However , equilibrium gliding was not successfully
achieved in the A test when the aim was to start gliding at “only” 5 ,500 ms−1.
It is clear , therefore, that the HTV -2 program was facing signiﬁcant challenges
at the time of its effective cancellation in 2012.
Importantly , lofting the trajectory of the booster to lengthen the exo-
atmospheric portion of the HTV -2’s trajectory appears to be ineffective at
increasing range. Speciﬁcally , if the the booster is launched on a minimum
=== page 22 ===
212 Acton
energy ballistic trajectory , the glider must pull-up through a much larger an-
gle and loses so much speed while doing so that its glide phase is dramati-
cally shortened. Because of the highly non-linear relationship between glide
range and speed, encapsulated in Eq. (1), this effect can more than offset any
lengthening of the ballistic portion of the trajectory . For example, in the B
ﬂight, the glider was due to start the pull-up at 6 ,440 ms−1. If it were injected
into the atmosphere at this speed from a minimum energy ballistic trajectory
it would have a path angle of about 30 ◦ and, according to Eq. (20), would be
slowed to only 2,900 ms−1 during the pull-up.43 So, although the weapon would
now cover about 6 ,700 km before re-entry , it could only travel a maximum of
1,200 km while gliding—shortening the weapon’s total range far below what
was planned for the B test. Moreover , lengthening the glider’s exo-atmopsheric
ﬂight at the expense of gliding range would undermine the Department of De-
fense’s argument that gliders would be easily distinguishable from ballistic
missiles.
Given that the AHW is now the leading CPGS candidate technology , it
would obviously be useful to be able to estimate its lift-to-drag ratio. Unfor-
tunately , there is not enough information to do so. The only public statement
on the range of the AHW—8 ,000 km—appears in the 2008 National Research
Council report. 44 Because the AHW has a shorter range than the HTV -2, one
might intuitively expect that it also has a lower lift-to-drag ratio. However ,
this argument is not necessarily correct. The AHW is launched by a less pow-
erful booster than the HTV -2 and so probably travels at signiﬁcantly slower
speeds.45 If so, it is possible their lift-to-drag ratios are similar .
The analysis of the HTV -2 test ﬂights also raises questions about the sur-
vivability of boost-glide weapons. One key argument for developing them is
that their speed can defeat advanced air and missile defenses, which are ex-
pected to become increasingly widespread over the next few decades. And, to
be sure, defending large areas against boost-glide weapons would present very
signiﬁcant challenges (not least because they travel at much lower altitudes
than ballistic missiles so would have to be much closer to any given radar to be
detectable). There is, however , reason to wonder whether boost-glide weapons
could reliably penetrate the sophisticated point defenses that advanced states
could use to try to defend exactly the high-value targets that CPGS weapons
might threaten.46
A boost-glide weapon may re-enter the atmosphere at extremely high
speeds but it slows as it approaches the target. In both the A and B test
ﬂights, it appears that the HTV -2 would have been traveling at between
2,000 ms−1 and 2 ,500 ms−1 at the end of its ﬂight. These speeds are charac-
teristic of ballistic missiles with ranges of around 500 km. Even today , such
missiles are potentially vulnerable to advanced point defenses and their sur-
vivability is likely to be further undermined in the future. To make matters
worse, because boost-glide weapons remain in the atmosphere for most of their
=== page 23 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 213
trajectory , they cannot be protected by countermeasures such as decoys or
chaff.
To be sure, the issue is far from cut and dry . If boost-glide weapons are
capable of faster speeds than planned for the HTV -2 test ﬂights, they would be
more survivable. Ultimately , however , the survivability of boost-glide weapons
might well depend on whether they are capable of executing sufﬁciently rapid
terminal maneuvering to evade interceptors. The United States demonstrated
this capability in the 1970s with the Mk-500 “Evader” RV . However , that sys-
tem was designed to deliver nuclear warheads, which present much less de-
manding accuracy requirements than non-nuclear ones. Indeed, one potential
challenge for boost-glide weapons is that the high accelerations required for
evasive maneuvering—measured in tens of g—could complicate the reception
of GPS signals, potentially undermining accuracy .47
Another important issue is whether missile defense interceptors could use
the large heat signature of a boost-glide weapon for homing. In particular , one
question that deserves further study is whether the U .S. Terminal High Al-
titude Area Defense (THAAD) system, which uses infra-red homing, could be
modiﬁed to intercept boost-glide weapons. This question arises because glid-
ers produce much more heat than the ballistic missile RVs that THAAD is in-
tended to counter . However , gliders must be intercepted at lower altitudes than
those at which THAAD intercepts typically occur . As a result, heating from
atmospheric friction could reduce the efﬁciency of THAAD’s infra-red seeker .
Quantitative analysis is needed to determine whether it could still prove effec-
tive.48
MILITARY EFFECTIVENESS OF BOOST-GLIDE WEAPONS
A discussion of aspects of the military effectiveness of boost-glide weapons is
available in an online supplement.
CONCLUSION
From a purely technical perspective, boost-glide weapons would offer cer-
tain unique attributes to military planners. Their speed is unmatched by any
other kinetic weapon, except for ballistic missiles. And, compared to ballistic
missiles, boost-glide weapons have potentially longer ranges, can generally
transport a heavier payload over a given range, are capable of midcourse ma-
neuvering, and ﬂy at lower altitudes. Understanding whether these attributes
would be likely to provide a signiﬁcant military advantage and, ultimately ,
whether the beneﬁts of boost-glide weapons would outweigh their costs and
risks raises a complex series of technical and policy questions. 49
=== page 24 ===
214 Acton
This article, some of which appears in an online supplement, explores some
of the technical issues, including the ability of boost-glide weapons to defeat
defenses, to deny an adversary tactical warning of an attack, and to destroy
mobile targets and hard and deeply buried ones. Given all the uncertainties,
there are no simple “yes or no” answers to important questions about boost-
glide weapons’ military capabilities. In fact, this article’s most important con-
tribution may be the new questions that are raised by its ﬁndings and, just as
importantly , its limitations. At least seven such questions stand out:
• First, what are the characteristics—the lift-to-drag ratio, in particular—of
hypersonic gliders other than the HTV -2? Weapon prototypes that are cur-
rently being ﬂight tested, including the U .S. Advanced Hypersonic Weapon,
the Chinese WU-14 and probable Russian programs, are of obvious
interest.
• Second, what limit does thermal protection place on the performance of
hypersonic gliders? Difﬁculties associated with heat management appear
to have been fatal to the HTV -2 program. This failure highlights the im-
portance of understanding quantitatively how the challenge of heat man-
agement is affected by a glider’s speed and lift-to-drag ratio. This, in turn,
would help understand what ranges gliders might be able to travel, how far
they might be able to maneuver cross-range, and how prompt they could
be.
• Third, would a more sophisticated mathematical model of the boost-glide
trajectory—of the pull-up, in particular—provide a qualitatively new un-
derstanding of the physics of boost-glide vehicles? The model set out in
this article is a minimal one, simple enough to enable an analytic treat-
ment. While a more complex and realistic model would presumably lead to
some quantitative changes in the results presented here, it would be inter-
esting to know whether it would lead to a qualitatively different picture.
• Fourth, would advanced terminal missile defenses be effective at defeat-
ing boost-glide weapons? Although this article identiﬁes a series of reasons
why intercepting gliders may be easier than intercepting ballistic missiles,
no deﬁnitive conclusion can be reached because it is unclear whether a
glider could execute sufﬁciently rapid terminal maneuvering to evade in-
terceptors. This question deserves more analysis. Likewise, the challenges
of modifying an interceptor missile armed with an infra-red seeker to in-
tercept a glider relatively low in the atmosphere, where heating can be a
signiﬁcant problem for the infra-red sensor , also deserve further consider-
ation.
• Fifth, would boost-glide weapons be vulnerable to countermeasures besides
missile defenses? The most obvious example of such a countermeasure is
=== page 25 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 215
GPS jamming. Understanding—at a quantitative level—the limitations on
weapon accuracy imposed by high-powered GPS jammers and the extent
to which they could be mitigated has important policy implications.
• Sixth, what are the costs and beneﬁts of developing early warning sensors
designed to detect the heat signal of incoming gliders. In theory , airborne
and/or space-based infra-red detectors could be used for this purpose, but
more work is needed to understand the trade-offs relative to other detection
systems. One particularly interesting question is whether the heat signal
of a glider is sufﬁciently strong to be detected by existing infra-red detec-
tion satellites, which are in geostationary orbit, or whether new satellites
orbiting at a lower altitude would be required.
• Seventh, and ﬁnally , are there militarily important targets that boost-glide
weapons are uniquely capable of holding at risk? Although weapon effects
are discussed in this article, some of the assumptions employed (partic-
ularly in the discussion of silo vulnerability) are quite crude and might
beneﬁt from being reﬁned. Moreover , to ask whether boost-glide weapons
are uniquely capable of threatening some targets is to demand a detailed
comparison with other weapon systems and their capabilities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am indebted to Tom Ehrhard, Richard Garwin, members of Princeton Uni-
versity’s Science and Global Security Program and, above all, David Wright for
useful conversations and valuable comments on earlier drafts. Of course, the
contents of this article remain my own responsibility .
FUNDING
This work was primarily funded by the John D. and Catherine T . MacArthur
Foundation, with supplementary support from the William and Flora Hewlett
Foundation and the Carnegie Corporation of New Y ork.
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.
NOTES AND REFERENCES
1. Robert Godwin, introduction to Dyna-Soar: Hypersonic Strategic Weapons System ,
ed. Godwin (Burlington, ON: Apogee Books, 2003), 7. S ¨anger subsequently devel-
oped the concept theoretically with his wife, the engineer Irene Bredt, under spon-
sorship of the German Government. See E. S ¨anger and I. Bredt, AR o c k e tD r i v e
=== page 26 ===
216 Acton
for Long Range Bombers [ ¨Uber einen Raketenantrieb f ¨ur Fernbomber], trans. M.
Hamermesh, CGD-32 (Technical Information Branch, Navy Department,[1952]),
www .astronautix.com/data/saenger .pdf.
2. For a summary of these efforts see James M. Acton, Silver Bullet? Ask-
ing the Right Questions About Conventional Prompt Global Strike (Wash-
ington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2013), 37–8,
http://carnegieendowment.org/ﬁles/cpgs.pdf.
3. For the history of the CPGS program see Amy F . Woolf, Conventional Prompt
Global Strike and Long-Range Ballistic Missiles: Background and Issues , CRS Re-
port for Congress, R41464 (Congressional Research Service, May 5, 2014). The lat-
est version of this report is available from www .fas.org/sgp/crs/nuke/R41464.pdf.
4. Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike Capability , Naval Studies
Board, and Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, the National Research
Council of the National Academies, U .S. Conventional Prompt Global Strike: Is-
sues for 2008 and Beyond (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2008), 115,
www .nap.edu/catalog.php?recordid=12061.
5. David Alexander and Andrea Shalal, “Experimental U .S. Hypersonic Weapon
Destroyed Seconds After Launch,” Reuters, August 25, 2014, http://www .reuters.
com/article/2014/08/25/us-usa-military-hypersonic-idUSKBN0GP1ED20140825.
6. “China Conﬁrms Hypersonic Missile Carrier Test,” Reuters, January 15, 2014,
www .reuters.com/article/2014/01/15/us-china-missile-idUSBREA0E0Z020140115.
7. James Acton, Catherine Dill, and Jeffrey Lewis, “Crashing Glider , Hidden
Hotspring: Analyzing China’s August 7, 2014 Hypersonic Glider Test,” Arms
Control Wonk (blog), September 3, 2014, http://lewis.armscontrolwonk.com/
archive/7443/crashing-glider-hidden-hotspring.
8. Ibid. For more general discussions of Chinese efforts see Acton, Silver Bul-
let?, 100–3; Mark A. Stokes, “China’s Quest for Joint Aerospace Power: Con-
cepts and Future Aspirations” in The Chinese Air Force: Evolving Con-
cepts, Roles, and Capabilities , eds. Richard P . Hallion, Roger Cliff, and
Phillip C. Saunders (Washington, DC: National Defense University Press
for the Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs, Institute for Na-
tional Strategic Studies, 2012), 50–5, www .ndu.edu/press/lib/pdf/books/chinese-
air-force.pdf; Lora Saalman, “Prompt Global Strike: China and the Spear ,”
Asia Paciﬁc Center for Security Studies, April 2014, http://www .apcss.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/04/APCSS Saalman PGS China Apr2014.pdf.
9. See, for example, Anatoly Antonov , “Russia Forced to Develop Global
Prompt Strike Weapons,” Security Index 19, (2013): 7; “Russia to Develop
Precision Conventional ICBM Option” RIA Novosti, December , 14 2012,
http://en.rian.ru/military news/20121214/178154441.html.
10. Pavel Podvig, “Russian Hypersonic Vehicle—More Dots Added to
Project 4202,” Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces (blog), August 26, 2014,
http://russianforces.org/blog/2014/08/russian hypersonic vehicle - m.shtml and
links therein. See also Acton, Silver Bullet?, 106–7.
11. The speed of sound is a function of altitude and varies non-monotonically from
340 ms−1 at sea-level to 275 ms−1 at an altitude of 85 km. At higher altitudes, when
the wavelength of sound becomes comparable to the mean free path of atmospheric
gases, speed of sound ceases to be a valid concept.
12. John D. Anderson, Jr ., Introduction to Flight , 4th ed. (Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill,
2000), 703.
13. Ibid., 703–4.
=== page 27 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 217
14. Acton, Silver Bullet?, 59–61.
15. Defense Science Board, Time Critical Conventional Strike From Strate-
gic Standoff (Washington, DC: Ofﬁce of the Under Secretary of De-
fense for Acquisition, Technology , and Logistics, March 2009), 26–8,
www .acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/ADA498403.pdf; Committee on Conventional Prompt
Global Strike Capability ,U .S. Conventional Prompt Global Strike, 52–3 and 121–3.
16. Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike Capability , U .S. Conventional
Prompt Global Strike , 115.
17. Debra G. Wymer , “Advanced Hypersonic Weapon Flight Test Overview to
the Space & Missile Defense Conference,” U .S. Army Space and Missile
Defense Command/Army Forces Strategic Command, August 14, 2012, 5,
http://www .smdc.army .mil/TechCenter/2013/PowerPoint/FINALAHWBrieftoSMDC
onference081312.pptx.
18. For a quantitative discussion see Frank J. Regan and Satya M. Anandakrishnan,
Dynamics of Atmospheric Re-Entry (Washington, DC: American Institute of Aero-
nautics and Astronautics, 1993), 190–2.
19. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr ., H. Julian Allen, and Stanford E. Neice, A Comparative
Analysis of the Performance of Long-Range Hypervelocity Vehicles , Report 1382
(Washington, DC: National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, [1958]), 12-3,
http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/19930092363 1993092363.pdf
20. DARPA, “Falcon HTV -2,” www .darpa.mil/Our Work/TTO/Programs/Falcon HTV -
2.aspx (now available from http://web.archive.org/web/20120205015141/http://www .
darpa.mil/Our Work/TTO/Programs/Falcon HTV -2.aspx).
21. Dean R. Chapman, An Approximate Analytical Method for Studying Entry
into Planetary Atmospheres , Technical Note 4276 (Washington, DC: National
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, May 1958), 24, http://naca.central.
cranﬁeld.ac.uk/reports/1958/naca-tn-4276.pdf. For a more intuitive presentation,
see Carl Gazley , Jr ., “Atmospheric Entry” in Handbook of Astronautical Engineer-
ing, ed. Heinz Hermann Koelle (New Y ork, NY: McGraw-Hill Book Company , 1961),
10-18.
22. Regan and Anandakrishnan, Dynamics of Atmospheric Re-Entry , 180–3.
23. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, and United States Air Force, U .S. Standard Atmosphere,
1976, NOAA-S/T 76-1562 (Washington, DC: U .S. Government Printing
Ofﬁce, October 1976), www .dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTRDoc?Location=U2&doc=GetTR-
Doc.pdf&AD=ADA035728. See also, Regan and Anandakrishnan, Dynamics of
Atmospheric Re-Entry, 37–8.
24. Gazley , “Atmospheric Entry ,” 10-10.
25. Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike Capability , U .S. Conventional
Prompt Global Strike , 208.
26. Acquisition Civil/Environmental Engineering, Space and Missile Systems Center ,
Environmental Assessment for Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 Flight Tests , April
2009, 16, www .dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a544343.pdf.
27. For a more detailed discussion of the test program and its challenges see Acton,
Silver Bullet?, 40–8 and 59–61.
28. Acquisition Civil/Environmental Engineering, Space and Missile Systems Center ,
Environmental Assessment for Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 Flight Tests , 15.
29. Jess Sponable, “Reusable Space Systems: 21st Century Technology Challlenges
[Sic],” DARPA, June 17, 2009, 20. No longer available online.
=== page 28 ===
218 Acton
30. Graham Warwick, “DARPA’s HTV -2 Didn’t Phone Home,” Ares (blog), Aviation
Week, April 24, 2010 (now available from http://archive.today/LPwT).
31. “Falcon HTV -2,” DARPA.
32. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency and U .S. Department of Defense,
Notice to Mariners , no. 18, May 1, 2010, III-1.10, http://msi.nga.mil/MSISite
Content/StaticFiles/NAV PUBS/UNTM/201018/NtM 18-2010.pdf.
33. John R. Harvey and Stefan Michalowski, “Nuclear Weapons Safety: The Case of
Trident,” Science & Global Security 4, (1994): 51; Lisbeth Gronlund and David C.
Wright, “Depressed Trajectory SLBMs: A Technical Evaluation and Arms Control
Possibilities,” Science & Global Security 3, (1992): 113. Note these sources use a
slightly different deﬁnition for β from the one adopted here ( mg/CD A as opposed to
m/CD A).
34. Anderson, Introduction to Flight , 696.
35. Acquisition Civil/Environmental Engineering, Space and Missile Systems Center ,
Environmental Assessment for Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 Flight Tests ,9 .
36. Sponable, “Reusable Space Systems,” 20.
37. S. Y . Chen, The Longitudinal and Lateral Range of Hypersonic Glide
Vehicles with Constant Bank Angle , Memorandum RM-4630-PR (Santa
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, January 1966), 10–1, www .dtic.mil/cgi-
bin/GetTRDoc?Location=U2&doc=GetTRDoc.pdf&AD=AD0629124.
38. Ibid.
39. In fact, βS does not need to be identical for the two ﬂights because the glider may
have been due to re-enter the atmosphere in the B ﬂight in a slightly different
orientation from the A ﬂight. Nonetheless, it is reassuring that the two estimates
are similar , even if they are almost certainly signiﬁcantly smaller than the true
value.
40. Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike Capability , U .S. Conventional
Prompt Global Strike , 206.
41. H. Julian Allen and A. J. Eggers, Jr ., A Study of the Motion and Aerodynamic
Heating of Ballistic Missiles Entering the Earth’s Atmosphere at High
Supersonic Speeds , Report 1381 (Washington, DC: National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics, 1958), http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/199300
91020 1993091020.pdf.
42. DARPA, “DARPA Concludes Review of Falcon HTV -2 Flight Anomaly ,”
Press Release, November 16, 2010, www .darpa.mil/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?
id=2147484134.
43. This calculation is rather approximate because it ignores the direct re-entry phase
and because the small angle assumption underlying Eq. (20) is questionable for a
path angle of 30 ◦.
44. Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike Capability et al., U .S. Conven-
tional Prompt Global Strike , 115.
45. U .S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command/Army Forces Strategic Command,
Advanced Hypersonic Weapon Program: Environmental Assessment , June 2011, 2-
2–2-3, www .smdcen.us/pubdocs/ﬁles/AHW%20Program%20FEA–30Jun11.pdf
46. Acton, Silver Bullet?, 73–7.
47. Defense Science Board, Time Critical Conventional Strike From Strategic Stand-
off , 26–8; Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike Capability et al., U. S.
Conventional Prompt Global Strike , 122.
48. For a discussion of the THAAD seeker’s operation in exo-atmospheric inter-
cepts see George N. Lewis, “Estimating the Detection Range of a THAAD-Like
=== page 29 ===
Hypersonic Boost-Glide Weapons 219
Seeker” in He Yingbo and Qiu Y ong, “THAAD-Like High Altitude The-
ater Missile Defense: Strategic Defense Capability and Certain Counter-
measures Analysis,” Science & Global Security 11, (2003): Appendix C,
http://scienceandglobalsecurity .org/archive/sgs11yong.pdf.
49. Acton, Silver Bullet?
